1. Respir Care. 2016 Apr;61(4):529-41. doi: 10.4187/respcare.04577.

High-Flow Nasal Cannula Oxygen Therapy in Adults: Physiological Benefits, 
Indication, Clinical Benefits, and Adverse Effects.

Nishimura M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Tokushima University 
Graduate School, Kuramoto, Tokushima, Japan. nmasaji@tokushima-u.ac.jp.

High-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) oxygen therapy is carried out using an air/oxygen 
blender, active humidifier, single heated tube, and nasal cannula. Able to 
deliver adequately heated and humidified medical gas at flows up to 60 L/min, it 
is considered to have a number of physiological advantages compared with other 
standard oxygen therapies, including reduced anatomical dead space, PEEP, 
constant F(IO2), and good humidification. Although few large randomized clinical 
trials have been performed, HFNC has been gaining attention as an alternative 
respiratory support for critically ill patients. Published data are mostly 
available for neonates. For critically ill adults, however, evidence is uneven 
because the reports cover various subjects with diverse underlying conditions, 
such as hypoxemic respiratory failure, exacerbation of COPD, postextubation, 
preintubation oxygenation, sleep apnea, acute heart failure, and conditions 
entailing do-not-intubate orders. Even so, across the diversity, many published 
reports suggest that HFNC decreases breathing frequency and work of breathing 
and reduces the need for respiratory support escalation. Some important issues 
remain to be resolved, such as definitive indications for HFNC and criteria for 
timing the starting and stopping of HFNC and for escalating treatment. Despite 
these issues, HFNC has emerged as an innovative and effective modality for early 
treatment of adults with respiratory failure with diverse underlying diseases.

Copyright © 2016 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.04577
PMID: 27016353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 May 24;11:1067-75. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S103607. eCollection 2016.

Acute oxygen therapy: a review of prescribing and delivery practices.

Cousins JL(1), Wark PA(2), McDonald VM(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Arts, Nursing and Theology, Avondale College of Higher Education, 
Sydney, Australia; School of Nursing and Midwifery, John Hunter Hospital, 
Newcastle, NSW, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Healthy Lungs, John 
Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, NSW, Australia.
(2)Priority Research Centre for Healthy Lungs, John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, 
NSW, Australia; School of Medicine and Public Health, The University of 
Newcastle, John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, NSW, Australia; Department of 
Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Hunter Medical Research Institute, John Hunter 
Hospital, Newcastle, NSW, Australia.
(3)School of Nursing and Midwifery, John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, NSW, 
Australia; Priority Research Centre for Healthy Lungs, John Hunter Hospital, 
Newcastle, NSW, Australia; School of Medicine and Public Health, The University 
of Newcastle, John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, NSW, Australia; Department of 
Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Hunter Medical Research Institute, John Hunter 
Hospital, Newcastle, NSW, Australia.

Oxygen is a commonly used drug in the clinical setting and like other drugs its 
use must be considered carefully. This is particularly true for those patients 
who are at risk of type II respiratory failure in whom the risk of hypercapnia 
is well established. In recent times, several international bodies have 
advocated for the prescription of oxygen therapy in an attempt to reduce this 
risk in vulnerable patient groups. Despite this guidance, published data have 
demonstrated that there has been poor uptake of these recommendations. Multiple 
interventions have been tested to improve concordance, and while some of these 
interventions show promise, the sustainability of these interventions are less 
convincing. In this review, we summarize data that have been published on the 
prevalence of oxygen prescription and the accurate and appropriate 
administration of this drug therapy. We also identify strategies that have shown 
promise in facilitating changes to oxygen prescription and delivery practice. 
There is a clear need to investigate the barriers, facilitators, and attitudes 
of clinicians in relation to the prescription of oxygen therapy in acute care. 
Interventions based on these findings then need to be designed and tested to 
facilitate the application of evidence-based guidelines to support sustained 
changes in practice, and ultimately improve patient care.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S103607
PMCID: PMC4888716
PMID: 27307722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. COPD. 2017 Jun;14(3):351-366. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2017.1319918. Epub 2017 May 
16.

Long-Term Oxygen Therapy in COPD Patients Who Do Not Meet the Actual 
Recommendations.

Ergan B(1), Nava S(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Faculty of Medicine , Dokuz 
Eylul University , Izmir , Turkey.
(2)b Department of Clinical, Integrated and Experimental Medicine (DIMES), 
Respiratory and Critical Care Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital , Alma Mater 
University , Bologna , Italy.

Chronic respiratory failure due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
is an increasing problem worldwide. Many patients with severe COPD develop 
hypoxemic respiratory failure during the natural progression of disease. 
Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) is a well-established supportive treatment for 
COPD and has been shown to improve survival in patients who develop chronic 
hypoxemic respiratory failure. The degree of hypoxemia is severe when partial 
pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2) is ≤55 mmHg and moderate if PaO2 is 
between 56 and 69 mmHg. Although current guidelines consider LTOT only in 
patients with severe resting hypoxemia, many COPD patients with moderate to 
severe disease experience moderate hypoxemia at rest or during special 
circumstances, such as while sleeping or exercising. The efficacy of LTOT in 
these patients who do not meet the actual recommendations is still a matter of 
debate, and extensive research is still ongoing to understand the possible 
benefits of LTOT for survival and/or functional outcomes such as the sensation 
of dyspnea, exacerbation frequency, hospitalizations, exercise capacity, and 
quality of life. Despite its frequent use, the administration of "palliative" 
oxygen does not seem to improve dyspnea except for delivery with high-flow 
humidified oxygen. This narrative review will focus on current evidence for the 
effects of LTOT in the presence of moderate hypoxemia at rest, during sleep, or 
during exercise in COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2017.1319918
PMID: 28506089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Respir Care. 2018 Jun;63(6):734-748. doi: 10.4187/respcare.06312.

Oxygen Therapy in COPD.

Branson RD(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Trauma and Critical Care, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, 
Ohio. He is also Editor in Chief of Respiratory Care. Richard.branson@uc.edu.

Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) at home has been demonstrated to improve 
survival in patients with COPD and severe resting hypoxemia. Support for LTOT is 
based on 2 landmark trials published nearly 4 decades ago. These results form 
the basis for reimbursement and prescription of LTOT to this day. Recent work 
has demonstrated no outcome benefit of LTOT in stable COPD patients with 
moderate desaturation at rest or during activity. Oxygen therapy during activity 
and exercise has been shown to alleviate symptoms and maintain arterial oxygen 
saturation, but not improve long-term outcomes. Oxygen therapy in COPD has a 
number of physiologic, functional, and biologic effects, not all of which are 
completely understood. Oxygen therapy in exacerbations of COPD can be both 
helpful and harmful. New guidance on the use of oxygen therapy during 
pre-hospital care has been published in the United Kingdom. Technology for LTOT 
represents a challenge for physicians writing prescriptions, durable medical 
equipment suppliers, caregivers, and patients. New technology for automated 
control of LTOT shows promise but is hampered by regulatory processes and cost 
pressures. Recent changes in government reimbursement for home oxygen therapy 
also present challenges. This paper will review the current evidence regarding 
LTOT in COPD and the impact on mortality and functional outcomes as well as 
reviewing technological challenges.

Copyright © 2018 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.06312
PMID: 29794207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. BMC Pulm Med. 2017 Nov 17;17(1):143. doi: 10.1186/s12890-017-0486-3.

Efficacy and safety of nasal high-flow oxygen in COPD patients.

Vogelsinger H(1), Halank M(2), Braun S(2), Wilkens H(3), Geiser T(4), Ott S(4), 
Stucki A(5), Kaehler CM(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Pneumology, Internal Medicine II, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical 
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Pneumology, Medical Clinic and Polyclinic, University Hospital Carl Gustav 
Carus, Dresden, Germany.
(3)Pneumology, Saarland University Medical Centre, Homburg, Germany.
(4)Department for Pulmonary Medicine, University Hospital Inselspital, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(5)Pneumology, Berner REHA Zentrum Heiligenschwendi, Heiligenschwendi, 
Switzerland.
(6)Pneumology, Internal Medicine II, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical 
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. c.m.kaehler@i-med.ac.at.
(7)Pneumology, Lung Centre Southwest, Wangen im Allgäu, Germany. 
c.m.kaehler@i-med.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: Nasal high-flow oxygen therapy (HFOT) is a novel treatment option 
for patients suffering from acute or chronic respiratory failure. Aim of our 
study was to compare safety and efficacy of HFOT with those of conventional 
oxygen treatment (COT) in normo- and hypercapnic COPD patients.
METHODS: A single cohort of 77 clinically stable hypoxemic patients with an 
indication for long-term oxygen treatment (LTOT) with or without hypercapnia 
successively received COT and HFOT for 60 min each, including oxygen adaption 
and separated by a 30 min washout phase.
RESULTS: HFOT was well-tolerated in all patients. A significant decrease in 
PaCO2 was observed during oxygen adaption of HFOT, and increased PaO2 coincided 
with significantly increased SpO2 and decreased AaDO2 during both treatment 
phases. Even at a flow rate of 15 L/min, oxygen requirement delivered as air 
mixture by HFOT tended to be lower than that of COT (2.2 L/min). Not only was no 
increase in static or dynamic lung volumes observed during HFOT, but even was a 
significant reduction of residual lung volume measured in 36 patients (28%).
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, short-term use of HFOT is safe in both normocapnic and 
hypercapnic COPD patients. Lower oxygen levels were effective in correcting 
hypoxemic respiratory failure and reducing hypercapnia, leading to a reduced 
amount of oxygen consumption. Long-term studies are needed to assess safety, 
tolerability, and clinical efficacy of HFOT.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01686893 13.09.2012 retrospectively 
registered (STIT-1) and NCT01693146 14.09.2012 retrospectively registered 
(STIT-2). Studies were approved by the local ethics committee (Ethikkommission 
der Medizinischen Universität Innsbruck, Studienkennzahl UN3547, Sitzungsnummer 
274/4.19).

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-017-0486-3
PMCID: PMC5693800
PMID: 29149867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Studies were registered at ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01686893 (STIT-1 [22]) and 
NCT01693146 (STIT-2 [23]) and approved and consented by the local ethics 
committee (Ethikkommission der Medizinischen Universität Innsbruck, 
Studienkennzahl UN3547, Sitzungsnummer 274/4.19). All the individuals gave their 
written informed consent to participate. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: Helene Vogelsinger received fees for lectures 
from TNI Medical AG, Würzburg and acts as a consultant for Linde Gas GmbH, 
Stadl-Paura. Michael Halank received personal fees for lectures from TNI Medical 
AG, Würzburg. Heinrike Wilkens received fees for lectures from TNI Medical AG, 
Würzburg. Christian M. Kaehler acts as a consultant for TNI Medical AG, 
Würzburg. The other authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


6. JAMA. 2019 Feb 26;321(8):786-797. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.0131.

Diagnosis and Outpatient Management of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A 
Review.

Riley CM(1), Sciurba FC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Department of Medicine, Allergy and Critical Care 
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

IMPORTANCE: There are 30 million adults (12%) in the United States who have 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease accounts for 3.2% of all physician office visits annually and is the 
fourth leading cause of death (126 000 deaths per year). Most patients are 
diagnosed by their primary care clinicians who must address the highly variable 
clinical features and responses to therapy. The diagnosis and treatment of COPD 
is rapidly changing, so understanding recent advances is important for the 
delivery of optimal patient care.
OBSERVATIONS: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is characterized by 
incompletely reversible expiratory airflow limitation. Spirometry is the 
reference standard for diagnosing and assessing the severity of COPD. All 
patients should be counseled about and receive preventive measures such as 
smoking cessation and vaccination. Treatment should be guided by the severity of 
lung impairment, symptoms such as dyspnea, the amount of cough and sputum 
production, and how often a patient experiences an exacerbation. When dyspnea 
limits activity or quality of life, COPD should be treated with once- or 
twice-daily maintenance long-acting anticholinergic and β-agonist 
bronchodilators. Patients with acute exacerbations may benefit from the addition 
of inhaled corticosteroids, particularly those with elevated peripheral 
eosinophil levels. Pulmonary rehabilitation, which includes strength and 
endurance training and educational, nutritional, and psychosocial support, 
improves symptoms and exercise tolerance but is underutilized. Supplemental 
oxygen for patients with resting hypoxemia (defined as Spo2 <89%) improves 
survival.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a 
complicated disease requiring intensive treatment. Appropriate use of 
long-acting maintenance bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids, and pulmonary 
rehabilitation decreases symptoms, optimizes functional performance, and reduces 
exacerbation frequency. Supplemental oxygen in patients with resting hypoxemia 
prolongs life, and other advanced treatments are available based on specific 
patient characteristics.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2019.0131
PMID: 30806700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. N Engl J Med. 2016 Oct 27;375(17):1617-1627. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1604344.

A Randomized Trial of Long-Term Oxygen for COPD with Moderate Desaturation.

Long-Term Oxygen Treatment Trial Research Group, Albert RK, Au DH, Blackford AL, 
Casaburi R, Cooper JA Jr, Criner GJ, Diaz P, Fuhlbrigge AL, Gay SE, Kanner RE, 
MacIntyre N, Martinez FJ, Panos RJ, Piantadosi S, Sciurba F, Shade D, Stibolt T, 
Stoller JK, Wise R, Yusen RD, Tonascia J, Sternberg AL, Bailey W.

Collaborators: Sampong E, Sloan K, Wagner A, Anderson S, Moy M, Okunbor O, 
Marlow S, Meli Y, Rice R, Aboussouan LS, Castele R, Parambil J, Khatri S, Pande 
A, Zein J, Olbrych T, Alkins S, Jocko C, Rahaghi F, Barton J, Underwood J, Make 
B, Davies J, Mularski R, Naleway A, Vertrees S, Porszasz J, Walker P, Indelicato 
R, Specht L, Ellstrom K, Portillo J, Horak D, Tiep B, Barnett M, Drake J, 
Rittinger M, Compton R, Miller S, Lach LA, Grabianowski C, Cordova F, Desai P, 
Krachman S, Mamary J, Marchetti N, Satti A, Mumm E, Vega-Olivo M, Hua J, Tauch 
V, Criner L-Y, Jacobs M, Rising P, Simonelli P, Mitchell M, Lammi M, Romaine C, 
Lee H, Ianacone M, Scharf S, Bell-Farrell W, Mador MJ, Rahman A, Zaman M, Hill 
L, Platt A, Harrington K, Dransfield M, Smith P, Davis D, Sriram P, Herring K, 
Han M, Rysso K, Meldrum C, Ravikrishnan KP, Keena D, DeRidder J, Kring B, 
Anzueto A, Aguilera A, Houlihan T, Girgis R, Cannestra J, Kelly B, Scholand MB, 
Villegas GM, Carle J, Udris E, Curtis R, Feemster LC, Goodman R, Moss B, Reinke 
L, Aitken M, Culver B, Castro M, Mittler B, Heaghney J, Jacobs M, Joo M, Bracken 
N, Diamond E, Joseph MK, Soler X, Villa A, Layish D, Silverman E, Kelly R, 
Cossette D, Belt P, Collison B, Dodge J, Donithan M, Ewing C, Jackson R, May KP, 
Meinert J, Reyes G, Smith M, Van Natta M, Wilson L, Wagoner A, Yates KP, Hakim 
R, Punturieri A, Bamdad J, Croxton T, Deshler J, McCord-Reynolds P, Stylianou M, 
Weinmann G, Bernard G, Anderson J, Lo B, Ries A, Stoloff S, Thomashow B, Tilley 
B, Weiss K.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Oct 27;375(17 ):1683-1684.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2017 Jan;5(1):13.
    N Engl J Med. 2017 Jan 19;376(3):286-7.
    N Engl J Med. 2017 Jan 19;376(3):287.
    N Engl J Med. ;376(3):286.
    N Engl J Med. ;376(3):286-7.
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Feb 21;166(4):JC17.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017 May 15;195(10 ):1394-1396.
    J Thorac Dis. 2017 Mar;9(3):E266-E268.

BACKGROUND: Long-term treatment with supplemental oxygen has unknown efficacy in 
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and resting or 
exercise-induced moderate desaturation.
METHODS: We originally designed the trial to test whether long-term treatment 
with supplemental oxygen would result in a longer time to death than no use of 
supplemental oxygen among patients who had stable COPD with moderate resting 
desaturation (oxyhemoglobin saturation as measured by pulse oximetry [Spo2], 89 
to 93%). After 7 months and the randomization of 34 patients, the trial was 
redesigned to also include patients who had stable COPD with moderate 
exercise-induced desaturation (during the 6-minute walk test, Spo2 ≥80% for ≥5 
minutes and <90% for ≥10 seconds) and to incorporate the time to the first 
hospitalization for any cause into the new composite primary outcome. Patients 
were randomly assigned, in a 1:1 ratio, to receive long-term supplemental oxygen 
(supplemental-oxygen group) or no long-term supplemental oxygen 
(no-supplemental-oxygen group). In the supplemental-oxygen group, patients with 
resting desaturation were prescribed 24-hour oxygen, and those with desaturation 
only during exercise were prescribed oxygen during exercise and sleep. The 
trial-group assignment was not masked.
RESULTS: A total of 738 patients at 42 centers were followed for 1 to 6 years. 
In a time-to-event analysis, we found no significant difference between the 
supplemental-oxygen group and the no-supplemental-oxygen group in the time to 
death or first hospitalization (hazard ratio, 0.94; 95% confidence interval 
[CI], 0.79 to 1.12; P=0.52), nor in the rates of all hospitalizations (rate 
ratio, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.91 to 1.13), COPD exacerbations (rate ratio, 1.08; 95% 
CI, 0.98 to 1.19), and COPD-related hospitalizations (rate ratio, 0.99; 95% CI, 
0.83 to 1.17). We found no consistent between-group differences in measures of 
quality of life, lung function, and the distance walked in 6 minutes.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with stable COPD and resting or exercise-induced 
moderate desaturation, the prescription of long-term supplemental oxygen did not 
result in a longer time to death or first hospitalization than no long-term 
supplemental oxygen, nor did it provide sustained benefit with regard to any of 
the other measured outcomes. (Funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; LOTT 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00692198 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1604344
PMCID: PMC5216457
PMID: 27783918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am Fam Physician. 2017 Apr 1;95(7):433-441.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Diagnosis and Management.

Gentry S(1), Gentry B(2).

Author information:
(1)Naval Medical Center Portsmouth, Portsmouth, VA, USA.
(2)USS Kearsarge, U.S. Forces Atlantic Fleet, Norfolk, VA, USA.

The diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) should be 
suspected in patients with risk factors (primarily a history of smoking) who 
report dyspnea at rest or with exertion, chronic cough with or without sputum 
production, or a history of wheezing. COPD may be suspected based on findings 
from the history and physical examination, but must be confirmed by spirometry 
to detect airflow obstruction. Findings that are most helpful to rule in COPD 
include a smoking history of more than 40 pack-years, a self-reported history of 
COPD, maximal laryngeal height, and age older than 45 years. The combination of 
three clinical variables-peak flow rate less than 350 L per minute, diminished 
breath sounds, and a smoking history of 30 pack-years or more-is another good 
clinical predictor, whereas the absence of all three of these signs essentially 
rules out airflow obstruction. Pharmacotherapy and smoking cessation are the 
mainstays of treatment, and pulmonary rehabilitation, long-term oxygen therapy, 
and surgery may be considered in select patients. Current guidelines recommend 
starting monotherapy with an inhaled bronchodilator, stepping up to combination 
therapy as needed, and/or adding inhaled corticosteroids as symptom severity and 
airflow obstruction progress.

PMID: 28409593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 May 15;197(10):1254-1264. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201802-0382CI.

Home Oxygen in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Lacasse Y(1), Tan AM(2), Maltais F(1), Krishnan JA(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Centre de Recherche, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de 
Pneumologie de Québec-Université Laval, Québec, Québec, Canada; and.
(2)2 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, Department of 
Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Two landmark trials conducted more than 35 years ago provided scientific 
evidence that, under very specific circumstances, long-term oxygen therapy 
(LTOT) may prolong life. These two trials enrolled 290 patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease and severe daytime hypoxemia documented by direct 
arterial blood gas measurement. From that time, LTOT became a standard of care, 
and the indications for oxygen therapy expanded to include nocturnal oxygen 
therapy for isolated nocturnal oxygen desaturation, ambulatory oxygen to correct 
exercise-induced desaturation, and short-burst oxygen to relieve dyspnea. In 
most cases, the rationale for broadening the indications for oxygen therapy is 
that, if hypoxemia exists, correcting it by increasing the FiO2 should help. 
However, with the exception of LTOT in severely hypoxemic patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, randomized controlled trials of oxygen therapy 
have failed to demonstrate clinically significant benefits. Also, adherence to 
LTOT is usually suboptimal. Important areas for future research include 
improving understanding of the mechanisms of action of supplemental oxygen, the 
clinical and biochemical predictors of responsiveness to LTOT, the methods for 
measuring and enhancing adherence to LTOT, and the cost-effectiveness of oxygen 
therapy. A standardization of terminology to describe the use of supplemental 
oxygen at home is provided.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201802-0382CI
PMID: 29547003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Thorax. 2016 Aug;71(8):759-61. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2015-207962. Epub 2016 Mar 
25.

Nasal high flow oxygen therapy in patients with COPD reduces respiratory rate 
and tissue carbon dioxide while increasing tidal and end-expiratory lung 
volumes: a randomised crossover trial.

Fraser JF(1), Spooner AJ(1), Dunster KR(2), Anstey CM(3), Corley A(1).

Author information:
(1)Critical Care Research Group, The Prince Charles Hospital and University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)Critical Care Research Group, The Prince Charles Hospital and University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia Biomedical Engineering and Medical Physics, 
Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, 
Australia.
(3)Critical Care Research Group, The Prince Charles Hospital and University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia Intensive Care Unit, Nambour General Hospital, 
Nambour, Australia.

Patients with COPD using long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) over 15 h per day have 
improved outcomes. As inhalation of dry cold gas is detrimental to mucociliary 
clearance, humidified nasal high flow (NHF) oxygen may reduce frequency of 
exacerbations, while improving lung function and quality of life in this cohort. 
In this randomised crossover study, we assessed short-term physiological 
responses to NHF therapy in 30 males chronically treated with LTOT. LTOT 
(2-4 L/min) through nasal cannula was compared with NHF at 30 L/min from an 
AIRVO through an Optiflow nasal interface with entrained supplemental oxygen. 
Comparing NHF with LTOT: transcutaneous carbon dioxide (TcCO2) (43.3 vs 
46.7 mm Hg, p<0.001), transcutaneous oxygen (TcO2) (97.1 vs 101.2 mm Hg, 
p=0.01), I:E ratio (0.75 vs 0.86, p=0.02) and respiratory rate (RR) (15.4 vs 
19.2 bpm, p<0.001) were lower; and tidal volume (Vt) (0.50 vs 0.40, p=0.003) and 
end-expiratory lung volume (EELV) (174% vs 113%, p<0.001) were higher. EELV is 
expressed as relative change from baseline (%Δ). Subjective dyspnoea and 
interface comfort favoured LTOT. NHF decreased TcCO2, I:E ratio and RR, with a 
concurrent increase in EELV and Vt compared with LTOT. This demonstrates a 
potential mechanistic rationale behind the improved outcomes observed in 
long-term treatment with NHF in oxygen-dependent patients.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ACTRN12613000028707.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2015-207962
PMCID: PMC4975837
PMID: 27015801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Nov 7;9:1241-52. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S41476. 
eCollection 2014.

Oxygen therapy in acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Brill SE(1), Wedzicha JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, 
London, UK.

Acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are 
important events in the history of this debilitating lung condition. Associated 
health care utilization and morbidity are high, and many patients require 
supplemental oxygen or ventilatory support. The last 2 decades have seen a 
substantial increase in our understanding of the best way to manage the 
respiratory failure suffered by many patients during this high-risk period. This 
review article examines the evidence underlying supplemental oxygen therapy 
during exacerbations of COPD. We first discuss the epidemiology and 
pathophysiology of respiratory failure in COPD during exacerbations. The 
rationale and evidence underlying oxygen therapy, including the risks when 
administered inappropriately, are then discussed, along with further strategies 
for ventilatory support. We also review current recommendations for best 
practice, including methods for improving oxygen provision in the future.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S41476
PMCID: PMC4230177
PMID: 25404854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2018 Mar;24(2):187-190. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000455.

Low-dose oxygen therapy in COPD patients: are there any radiation-like risks?

Iyer VN(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Low-dose oxygen (LDO) supplementation is used by millions of 
COPD patients worldwide. The therapeutic benefits of LDO supplementation are 
well known. There are also several concerns regarding the potential for cellular 
harm from LDO in COPD patients. This review summarizes the current arguments and 
evidence pertaining to this important topic.
RECENT FINDINGS: LDO therapy has been used in COPD patients for more than 50 
years. Over the years, data from randomized controlled trials has confirmed that 
LDO provides survival benefit in COPD patients with severe hypoxemia. Recent 
data, however, show that LDO does not provide any morality benefit for patients 
with a less severe degree of hypoxemia. There are several theoretical concerns 
regarding use of LDO in COPD patients, including radiation-like cellular risks 
because of oxygen toxicity. However, none of these have been validated in human 
clinical trials and remain somewhat peripheral to the clinician deciding whether 
or not to initiate LDO in a hypoxemic COPD patient.
SUMMARY: There is high-quality evidence that LDO is both well tolerated and 
highly efficacious for patients with COPD. There are several theoretical 
concerns regarding damage from oxygen free radicals from LDO in COPD patients. 
However, none of these have been validated or confirmed in human clinical trial 
data. Thus, the benefits of LDO clearly outweigh the risks from any theoretical 
concerns about oxygen toxicity.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000455
PMID: 29232278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Thorax. 2015 Jun;70 Suppl 1:i1-43. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2015-206865.

British Thoracic Society guidelines for home oxygen use in adults.

Hardinge M(1), Annandale J(2), Bourne S(3), Cooper B(4), Evans A(5), Freeman 
D(6), Green A(7), Hippolyte S(8), Knowles V(9), MacNee W(10), McDonnell L(11), 
Pye K(12), Suntharalingam J(13), Vora V(14), Wilkinson T(15); British Thoracic 
Society Home Oxygen Guideline Development Group; British Thoracic Society 
Standards of Care Committee.

Author information:
(1)Oxford Centre of Respiratory Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Oxford, UK.
(2)Hywel Dda University Health Board, Prince Philip Hospital, Llanelli, UK.
(3)Portsmouth NHS Trust, Portsmouth, UK.
(4)Lung Function and Sleep, Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Staffordshire and Stoke-on-Trent Partnership Trust, Staffordshire, UK.
(6)Mundesley Medical Centre, Mundesley, UK.
(7)Improvement Academy (Y&H AHSN) Bradford Teaching Hospitals NHS FT, Wakefield, 
UK.
(8)Royal Brompton Hospital, London, UK.
(9)Respiratory Care Team, Virgin Care, Surrey, UK.
(10)University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(11)Department of Physiotherapy, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, St 
Thomas' Hospital, London, UK.
(12)Aintree University Hospital, Liverpool, UK.
(13)Respiratory Department, Royal United Hospital, Bath, UK.
(14)Northern General Hospital, Sheffield, UK.
(15)Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Southampton, Southampton, UK.

The British Thoracic Society (BTS) Home Oxygen Guideline provides detailed 
evidence-based guidance for the use of home oxygen for patients out of hospital. 
Although the majority of evidence comes from the use of oxygen in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, the scope of the guidance includes 
patients with a variety of long-term respiratory illnesses and other groups in 
whom oxygen is currently ordered, such as those with cardiac failure, cancer and 
end-stage cardiorespiratory disease, terminal illness or cluster headache. It 
explores the evidence base for the use of different modalities of oxygen therapy 
and patient-related outcomes such as mortality, symptoms and quality of life. 
The guideline also makes recommendations for assessment and follow-up protocols, 
and risk assessments, particularly in the clinically challenging area of home 
oxygen users who smoke. The guideline development group is aware of the 
potential for confusion sometimes caused by the current nomenclature for 
different types of home oxygen, and rather than renaming them, has adopted the 
approach of clarifying those definitions, and in particular emphasising what is 
meant by long-term oxygen therapy and palliative oxygen therapy. The home oxygen 
guideline provides expert consensus opinion in areas where clinical evidence is 
lacking, and seeks to deliver improved prescribing practice, leading to improved 
compliance and improved patient outcomes, with consequent increased value to the 
health service.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2015-206865
PMID: 25870317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. COPD. 2017 Jun;14(3):346-350. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2017.1315715. Epub 2017 May 
1.

Use of Nasal High Flow in Stable COPD: Rationale and Physiology.

Pisani L(1), Vega ML(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Specialistic, Diagnostic and Experimental Medicine (DIMES), 
Respiratory and Critical Care, Sant'Orsola Malpighi Hospital, Alma Mater 
Studiorum , University of Bologna , Bologna , Italy.
(2)b Department of Physical Therapy, Fundacion Favaloro University Hospital , 
UCI , Buenos Aires , Argentina.

High-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) is a device able to deliver heated and humidified 
oxygen at high flows (up to 60 L/minutes). Potential benefits of HFNC are 
several and include the improvement of lung mucociliary clearance, the washout 
of upper airway dead space, the generation of a low level of positive airway 
pressure (PEEP effect), the decrease in inspiratory resistance and at the same 
time the increase in expiratory resistance. The present review aimed to describe 
the evidence surrounding the use of HFNC in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease patients.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2017.1315715
PMID: 28459282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Respirology. 2016 Jul;21(5):791-809. doi: 10.1111/resp.12782. Epub 2016 Apr 21.

Non-pharmacological treatments for COPD.

Mulhall P(1), Criner G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Temple University 
Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects roughly 10% of the global 
population and is growing in prevalence annually. COPD is characterized by 
progressive non-reversible narrowing of airways mainly due to cigarette smoking. 
Therapeutic interventions aimed at altering this progressive disease course can 
largely be grouped into pharmacological or non-pharmacological therapies. The 
focus of this paper is on the non-pharmacological aspects of COPD management, 
reviewing the current literature to provide an evidence-based management 
approach. Non-pharmacological therapies reviewed in this article include the 
implementation of comprehensive care models utilizing a coordinated 
multidisciplinary team, tele-monitoring and patient-centred approach to optimize 
COPD care and improve compliance. Preventing progression of COPD via smoking 
cessation remains of paramount importance, and newer therapeutic options 
including electronic cigarettes show promise in small studies as cessation aids. 
COPD has systemic manifestations that can be ameliorated with the enrollment in 
pulmonary rehabilitation programmes, which focus on exercise endurance to 
improve dyspnoea and quality of life. Advanced therapeutics for COPD includes 
lung volume reduction surgery for a pre-specified cohort and minimally invasive 
bronchoscopic valves that in recent reviews show promise. Lastly, patients on 
maximal COPD therapy with progressive disease can be referred for lung 
transplantation; however, this often requires a highly selected and motivated 
patient and care team. Survival rates for lung transplantation are improving; 
thus, this procedure remains a viable option as more expertise and experience 
are gained.

© 2016 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12782
PMID: 27099216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2017;161:D1367.

[Oxygen therapy not required for all COPD patients].

[Article in Dutch]

Vanfleteren LE(1).

Author information:
(1)CIRO, afd. Onderzoek en onderwijs, Horn en MUMC+, afd. Longziekten, 
Maastricht.

Long-term oxygen therapy in patients with pronounced hypoxia is an important and 
life-extending therapy. Many patients have only mild hypoxia, do not experience 
nocturnal desaturation, or experience desaturation only during exercise. While 
often applied in clinical practice, the clinical relevance of oxygen therapy was 
not clear in these patients. A recent randomized controlled trial has now 
revealed no additional value for long-term oxygen therapy in subjects with mild 
oxygen desaturation or exercise-induced oxygen desaturation only. Furthermore, 
treatment burden, adverse events and healthcare costs associated with oxygen 
therapy need to be considered; restriction of the prescription of oxygen therapy 
is, therefore, appropriate. On the other hand, oxygen therapy is still 
considered important in non-severe hypoxic subjects with severe exercise-related 
desaturation (< 80%); in selected cases during endurance training in pulmonary 
rehabilitation; or in individual subjects with desaturation and pronounced and 
proven benefit of oxygen therapy on their symptoms and exercise capacity.

PMID: 28351441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Thorax. 2017 Apr;72(4):373-375. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209673. Epub 2017 
Jan 19.

Change in pulmonary mechanics and the effect on breathing pattern of high flow 
oxygen therapy in stable hypercapnic COPD.

Pisani L(1), Fasano L(2), Corcione N(1), Comellini V(1), Musti MA(3), Brandao 
M(4), Bottone D(5), Calderini E(6), Navalesi P(7)(8), Nava S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical, Integrated and Experimental Medicine (DIMES), 
Respiratory and Critical Care Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Alma Mater 
University, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Sant'Orsola Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Public Health, Local Health Authority of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.
(4)Respiratory Department, Centro Hospitar de Tràs-os-Montes e Alto Douro, São 
Pedro de Vila Rea, Portugal.
(5)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, 
Universita' degli Studi di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(6)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda, 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy.
(7)Department of Translational Medicine, Università del Piemonte Orientale 
'Amedeo Avogadro', Novara, Italy.
(8)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Sant'Andrea Hospital, 
Vercelli, Italy.

: We studied the effects of high flow oxygen therapy (HFOT) versus non-invasive 
ventilation (NIV) on inspiratory effort, as assessed by measuring 
transdiaphragmatic pressure, breathing pattern and gas exchange. Fourteen 
patients with hypercapnic COPD underwent five 30-min trials: HFOT at two flow 
rates, both with open and closed mouth, and NIV, applied in random order. After 
each trial standard oxygen therapy was reinstituted for 10 min. Compared with 
baseline, HFOT and NIV significantly improved breathing pattern, although to 
different extents, and reduced inspiratory effort; however, arterial carbon 
dioxide oxygen tension decreased but not significantly. These results indicate a 
possible role for HFOT in the long-term management of patients with stable 
hypercapnic COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02363920.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209673
PMID: 28104830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2017 Jun;11(6):425-441. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2017.1325323. Epub 2017 May 10.

Home oxygen therapy: evidence versus reality.

Magnet FS(1), Storre JH(1)(2), Windisch W(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pneumology, Faculty of Health/School of Medicine, Cologne 
Merheim Hospital , Kliniken der Stadt Köln gGmbH, Witten/Herdecke University , 
Köln , Germany.
(2)b Department of Pneumology , University Medical Hospital , Freiburg , 
Germany.

LTOT is a well-established treatment option for hypoxemic patients. Scientific 
evidence for its benefits of LTOT dates back to the 1980s, when two randomized 
controlled trials showed prolonged survival in COPD-patients undergoing LTOT for 
at least 15 hours/day. In contrast, the potential benefits of LTOT in 
non-COPD-patients has not been well researched and the recommendations for its 
application are primarily extrapolated from trials on COPD-patients. Recently, a 
large trial confirmed that COPD-patients who don't meet classic indication 
criteria, and have moderate desaturation at rest or during exercise, do not 
benefit from oxygen therapy. Also the significant technical evolution of LTOT 
devices has improved its application. Areas covered: A literature research was 
performed in pubmed regarding home oxygen therapy (terms: LTOT, ambulatory 
oxygen therapy, short burst oxygen therapy, nocturnal oxygen therapy). Expert 
commentary: LTOT proved a survival benefit for COPD patients about 30 years ago. 
Whether the results of these trials are still valid for patients under modern 
treatment guidelines remains unknown. Nevertheless, the classic indication 
criteria for LTOT still persist in guidelines, since there is a lack of updated 
evidence for the effects of LTOT in more severe hypoxemic patients.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2017.1325323
PMID: 28454510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 May 15;13:1577-1582. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S132718. eCollection 2018.

The effects of home oxygen therapy on energy metabolism in patients with COPD.

Kırıcı Berber N(1), Yetkin Ö(2), Kılıç T(2), Berber I(3), Özgel M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Disease Clinic, Malatya Training and Research Hospital.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Inonu University Faculty of Medicine, 
Turgut Ozal Medical Center.
(3)Department of Haemotology Clinic.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery Clinic, Malatya Training and Research 
Hospital, Malatya, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: COPD is preventable and treatable and is characterized by completely 
nonreversible airflow obstruction. In this study, we aimed to investigate the 
effect of long-term oxygen therapy on patients with stage 4 COPD who were 
followed up and treated at the polyclinic or clinic service. We evaluated the 
effects of oxygen therapy on energy metabolism and physical activity in patients 
with COPD.
METHODS: Nineteen patients with COPD (16 male/3 female), treated with oxygen 
therapy for the first time, were included in this study. Analysis of arterial 
blood gases and pulmonary function test was performed. Metabolic Holter device 
(SenseWear® Armband) was placed pre- and post-oxygen therapy on the patients' 
arm for at least 3 days. This device captures Holter data in a digitized 
electronic system, and the daily average value was calculated from the data.
RESULTS: Post-oxygen treatment showed a significant increase in energy 
expenditure by patients with COPD (pretreatment, 1,497±596 joule; posttreatment, 
2,977±5,985 joule; P=0.044). Moreover, number of steps during walking 
(pretreatment, 2,056±256; posttreatment, 2,120±195; P=0.03), resting 
(pretreatment, 6.36±3.31 hours; posttreatment, 3.47±2.19 hours; P<0.03), and 
sleeping (pretreatment, 4.23±2.13 hours; posttreatment, 2.33±1.42 hours; P<0.00) 
showed significant differences. Increased daily energy expenditure in patients 
with respiratory failure was detected with long-term oxygen therapy. In 
addition, the immobility of patients decreased and duration of physical activity 
increased in patients with COPD.
CONCLUSION: In this study, positive effects of long-term oxygen therapy have 
been demonstrated with respect to energy metabolism and physical activity of 
patients with COPD. Thus, we recommend that medication adherence and long-term 
oxygen therapy should begin early in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S132718
PMCID: PMC5960253
PMID: 29805256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


20. Crit Care. 2018 Aug 2;22(1):180. doi: 10.1186/s13054-018-2107-9.

High-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy decreases postextubation neuroventilatory 
drive and work of breathing in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Di Mussi R(1), Spadaro S(2), Stripoli T(1), Volta CA(2), Trerotoli P(3), 
Pierucci P(4), Staffieri F(5), Bruno F(1), Camporota L(6), Grasso S(7).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento dell'Emergenza e Trapianti d'Organo (DETO), Sezione di 
Anestesiologia e Rianimazione, Ospedale Policlinico, Università degli Studi di 
Bari "Aldo Moro", Piazza Giulio Cesare 11, Bari, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Morfologia, Chirurgia e Medicina Sperimentale, Sezione di 
Anestesiologia e Terapia Intensiva Universitaria, Università degli studi di 
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche ed Oncologia Umana, Cattedra di Statistica 
Medica, Università degli Studi Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Medicina Respiratoria e del Sonno, Università degli Studi di 
Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento dell'Emergenza e Trapianti d'Organo (DETO), Sezione di Chirurgia 
Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(6)Department of Adult Critical Care, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, 
King's Health Partners, and Division of Centre of Human Applied Physiological 
Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.
(7)Dipartimento dell'Emergenza e Trapianti d'Organo (DETO), Sezione di 
Anestesiologia e Rianimazione, Ospedale Policlinico, Università degli Studi di 
Bari "Aldo Moro", Piazza Giulio Cesare 11, Bari, Italy. 
salvatore.grasso@uniba.it.

Comment in
    Crit Care. 2019 Jan 17;23(1):17.
    Med Klin Intensivmed Notfmed. 2019 Mar;114(2):96-97.

BACKGROUND: The physiological effects of high-flow nasal cannula O2 therapy 
(HFNC) have been evaluated mainly in patients with hypoxemic respiratory 
failure. In this study, we compared the effects of HFNC and conventional 
low-flow O2 therapy on the neuroventilatory drive and work of breathing 
postextubation in patients with a background of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) who had received mechanical ventilation for hypercapnic 
respiratory failure.
METHODS: This was a single center, unblinded, cross-over study on 14 
postextubation COPD patients who were recovering from an episode of acute 
hypercapnic respiratory failure of various etiologies. After extubation, each 
patient received two 1-h periods of HFNC (HFNC1 and HFNC2) alternated with 1 h 
of conventional low-flow O2 therapy via a face mask. The inspiratory fraction of 
oxygen was titrated to achieve an arterial O2 saturation target of 88-92%. Gas 
exchange, breathing pattern, neuroventilatory drive (electrical diaphragmatic 
activity (EAdi)) and work of breathing (inspiratory trans-diaphragmatic 
pressure-time product per minute (PTPDI/min)) were recorded.
RESULTS: EAdi peak increased from a mean (±SD) of 15.4 ± 6.4 to 23.6 ± 10.5 μV 
switching from HFNC1 to conventional O2, and then returned to 15.2 ± 6.4 μV 
during HFNC2 (conventional O2: p < 0.05 versus HFNC1 and HFNC2). Similarly, the 
PTPDI/min increased from 135 ± 60 to 211 ± 70 cmH2O/s/min, and then decreased 
again during HFNC2 to 132 ± 56 (conventional O2: p < 0.05 versus HFNC1 and 
HFNC2).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with COPD, the application of HFNC postextubation 
significantly decreased the neuroventilatory drive and work of breathing 
compared with conventional O2 therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s13054-018-2107-9
PMCID: PMC6091018
PMID: 30071876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ethical approval was obtained by the local 
ethics committee (Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Policlinico di Bari Ethic 
Committee, protocol number: 885/C.E., May 2014). All patients or their relatives 
provided informed consent to participate. Not applicable. SG has given talks in 
symposia organized by Getinge Critical Care (Solna Sweden), Estor Critical Care 
(Mirandola, Italy), and Fisher and Paykel (Auckland, New Zealand), and has 
received compensation for related travel and accommodation fees. He declares no 
other relationship or activities that could appear to have influence the 
submitted work. The remaining authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims 
in published maps and institutional affiliations.


21. Respiration. 2017;93(4):253-263. doi: 10.1159/000455879. Epub 2017 Feb 1.

Long-Term Oxygen Therapy: Comparison of the German and British Guidelines.

Magnet FS(1), Schwarz SB, Callegari J, Criée CP, Storre JH, Windisch W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pneumology, Cologne Merheim Hospital, Kliniken der Stadt Köln 
gGmbH, Faculty of Health/School of Medicine, Witten/Herdecke University, 
Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The German guideline on long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) was 
published in 2008 by the German Respiratory Society (DGP), while the British 
Thoracic Society (BTS) published their most recent guideline in 2015.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the present article was to highlight the major areas of 
consensus and disagreement in the recently published BTS and DGP guidelines on 
LTOT.
METHODS: The BTS and DGP guidelines were directly compared in terms of 
congruencies and differences. A critical appraisal was then performed and 
authors' suggestions were provided.
RESULTS: The 2 guidelines are almost congruent in 2 major areas, namely, (1) the 
indication criteria for LTOT in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
patients at rest and (2) the recommended duration of LTOT over a 24-h period. 
However, 8 major areas in which the guidelines differ considerably were 
identified: (1) techniques for blood gas analysis; (2) timing of LTOT in stable 
patients; (3) LTOT in post-exacerbation COPD patients; (4) ambulatory oxygen 
therapy; (5) nocturnal oxygen therapy; (6) titration of oxygen flow rates; (7) 
follow-up visits; and (8) LTOT for patients who still smoke. Furthermore, the 
BTS guideline is much more detailed, includes more references (161 vs. 71) and 
is more up to date than the DGP guideline.
CONCLUSION: There are major differences between the 2 guidelines. Many of the 
aspects raised by the BTS guideline appear to be reasonable with regard to the 
current literature, clinical experience and prescription practices. However, an 
international consensus on LTOT is lacking.

© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000455879
PMID: 28142139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Apr 16;13:1195-1205. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S159666. eCollection 2018.

Long-term effects of oxygen-enriched high-flow nasal cannula treatment in COPD 
patients with chronic hypoxemic respiratory failure.

Storgaard LH(1), Hockey HU(2), Laursen BS(3)(4), Weinreich UM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark.
(2)Biometrics Matters Limited, Hamilton, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(4)Clinical Nursing Research Unit, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark.

BACKGROUND: This study investigated the long-term effects of humidified 
high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) in COPD patients with chronic hypoxemic 
respiratory failure treated with long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 200 patients were randomized into usual care ± 
HFNC. At inclusion, acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) and hospital admissions 
1 year before inclusion, modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) score, St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
(FEV1), 6-minute walk test (6MWT) and arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2) were 
recorded. Patients completed phone interviews at 1, 3 and 9 months assessing 
mMRC score and AECOPD since the last contact. At on-site visits (6 and 12 
months), mMRC, number of AECOPD since last contact and SGRQ were registered and 
FEV1, FEV1%, PaCO2 and, at 12 months, 6MWT were reassessed. Hospital admissions 
during the study period were obtained from hospital records. Hours of the use of 
HFNC were retrieved from the high-flow device.
RESULTS: The average daily use of HFNC was 6 hours/day. The HFNC group had a 
lower AECOPD rate (3.12 versus 4.95/patient/year, p<0.001). Modeled hospital 
admission rates were 0.79 versus 1.39/patient/year for 12- versus 1-month use of 
HFNC, respectively (p<0.001). The HFNC group had improved mMRC scores from 3 
months onward (p<0.001) and improved SGRQ at 6 and 12 months (p=0.002, p=0.033) 
and PaCO2 (p=0.005) and 6MWT (p=0.005) at 12 months. There was no difference in 
all-cause mortality.
CONCLUSION: HFNC treatment reduced AECOPD, hospital admissions and symptoms in 
COPD patients with hypoxic failure.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S159666
PMCID: PMC5909797
PMID: 29713153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Hans-Ulrich Hockey received 
remuneration from Fisher & Paykel, who also contributed equipment and some 
administration costs. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


23. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2018 Mar;11(3):279-289. doi: 
10.1080/17512433.2018.1421457. Epub 2018 Jan 4.

Home oxygen therapy: re-thinking the role of devices.

Melani AS(1), Sestini P(2), Rottoli P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Fisiopatologia e Riabilitazione Respiratoria, Dipartimento Vasi, Cuore e 
Torace, Policlinico Le Scotte , Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese , Siena 
, Italy.
(2)b Clinica delle Malattie dell'Apparato Respiratorio, Dipartimento di Medicine 
Specialistica, Policlinico Le Scotte , Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese 
, Siena , Italy.

A range of devices are available for delivering and monitoring home oxygen 
therapy (HOT). Guidelines do not give indications for the choice of the delivery 
device but recommend the use of an ambulatory system in subjects on HOT whilst 
walking. Areas covered: We provide a clinical overview of HOT and review 
traditional and newer delivery and monitoring devices for HOT. Despite relevant 
technology advancements, clinicians, faced with many challenges when they 
prescribe oxygen therapy, often remain familiar to traditional devices and 
continuous flow delivery of oxygen. Some self-filling delivery-less devices 
could increase the users' level of independence with ecological advantage and, 
perhaps, reduced cost. Some newer portable oxygen concentrators are being 
available, but more work is needed to understand their performances in different 
diseases and clinical settings. Pulse oximetry has gained large diffusion 
worldwide and some models permit long-term monitoring. Some closed-loop portable 
monitoring devices are also able to adjust oxygen flow automatically in 
accordance with the different needs of everyday life. This might help to improve 
adherence and the practice of proper oxygen titration that has often been 
omitted because difficult to perform and time-consuming. Expert commentary: The 
prescribing physicians should know the characteristics of newer devices and use 
technological advancements to improve the practice of HOT.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2018.1421457
PMID: 29272974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Respir Care. 2018 Nov;63(11):1321-1330. doi: 10.4187/respcare.05916. Epub 2018 
Jun 19.

Perspectives From COPD Subjects on Portable Long-Term Oxygen Therapy Devices.

AlMutairi HJ(1)(2), Mussa CC(3), Lambert CT(4), Vines DL(1), Strickland SL(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Care, Department of Cardiopulmonary Sciences, Rush 
University Medical Center, College of Health Sciences, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Division of Respiratory Care, Department of Cardiopulmonary Sciences, Rush 
University Medical Center, College of Health Sciences, Chicago, Illinois. 
constance_mussa@rush.edu.
(4)School of Education, University of the West Indies, Mona, Kingston, Jamaica.
(5)Department of Member Services, American Association for Respiratory Care.

Comment in
    Respir Care. 2018 Nov;63(11):1452-1454.

BACKGROUND: Oxygen therapy for patients with COPD and severe hypoxemia requires 
the use of oxygen delivery devices that allow mobility as needed. However, the 
characteristics of some devices may limit the freedom of individuals to be as 
physically active as they desire. Limited mobility may negatively affect the 
perceived quality of life of individuals with COPD. The aim of this study was to 
understand perceived limitations that patients with COPD experience in using 
long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) devices.
METHODS: We performed a qualitative analysis of 311 responses to an open-ended 
question from a previously deployed electronic survey designed to investigate 
how LTOT devices affect oxygen-dependent patients with COPD. Our thematic 
analysis was facilitated by NVivo, a qualitative data analysis software package. 
This involved identifying patterns and themes within the robust, text-rich data 
from the open-ended survey question regarding the survey subjects' experiences 
with their LTOT devices. Cluster analysis was also performed to highlight 
relationships between various concepts.
RESULTS: Themes generated revealed that subjects experienced decreased mobility, 
which resulted in feelings of decreased autonomy and isolation. We also found 
that subjects perceived a decrease in quality of life due to their described 
experience of portable oxygen cylinders being heavy and cumbersome. Subjects 
described feelings of fear and anxiety due to insufficient support for breathing 
provided by pulse-dose portable oxygen concentrators, as well as portable oxygen 
cylinders that run out before they are able to complete errands and other 
activities of daily living. Some subjects also reported that they willingly pay 
for liquid oxygen systems out-of-pocket because of the mobility it affords, 
which in their perception improves their quality of life.
CONCULSIONS: Oxygen-dependent individuals with COPD may be at risk of adverse 
outcomes associated with decreased mobility encouraged by unsatisfactory 
physical and technical characteristics of portable oxygen cylinders and 
concentrators.

Copyright © 2018 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.05916
PMID: 29921606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Aug 28;13:2623-2628. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S167523. eCollection 2018.

Daily duration of long-term oxygen therapy and risk of hospitalization in 
oxygen-dependent COPD patients.

Sundh J(1), Ahmadi Z(2), Ekström M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, School of Medical Sciences, Örebro 
University, Örebro, Sweden, josefin.sundh@oru.se.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Respiratory Medicine and 
Allergology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) improves survival and may reduce 
hospital admissions in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) and severe hypoxemia, but the impact of daily duration of LTOT on 
hospitalization rate is unknown. We aimed to estimate the association between 
the daily duration of LTOT (24 vs 15 h/d) and hospital admissions in patients 
with LTOT due to COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A population-based, cohort study included patients who 
started LTOT due to COPD between October 1, 2005 and June 30, 2009 in the 
Swedish national register for respiratory failure (Swedevox). Time to first 
hospitalization from all causes and from respiratory or nonrespiratory disease, 
using the National Patient Registry, was analyzed using Fine-Gray regression, 
adjusting for potential confounders.
RESULTS: A total of 2,249 patients with COPD (59% women) were included. LTOT 24 
h/d was prescribed to 539 (24%) and LTOT 15-16 h/d to 1,231 (55%) patients. 
During a median follow-up of 1.1 years (interquartile range, 0.6-2.1 years), 
1,702 (76%) patients were hospitalized. No patient was lost to follow-up. The 
adjusted rate of all-cause hospitalization was similar between LTOT 24 and 15-16 
h/d (subdistribution hazard ratio [SHR] 0.96; [95% CI] 0.84-1.08), as was 
cause-specific hospitalizations analyzed for respiratory disease (SHR: 1.00; 95% 
CI: 0.86-1.17) and nonrespiratory disease (SHR: 0.92; 95% CI: 0.75-1.14).
CONCLUSION: LTOT prescribed for 24 h/d was not associated with decreased 
hospitalization rates compared with LTOT for 15-16 h/d in patients with 
oxygen-dependent COPD. The results should be validated in a randomized 
controlled trial.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S167523
PMCID: PMC6118242
PMID: 30214180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


26. Clin Respir J. 2018 Apr;12(4):1439-1446. doi: 10.1111/crj.12680. Epub 2017 Aug 
13.

Effectiveness of pulmonary rehabilitation in COPD patients receiving long-term 
oxygen therapy.

Sahin H(1), Varol Y(2), Naz I(3), Tuksavul F(1).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, Dr. Suat Seren Chest Diseases and Thoracic 
Surgery Training and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Department of Chest Diseases, Dr. Suat Seren Chest Diseases and Thoracic 
Surgery Training and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, Katip Celebi University, Department of 
Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Izmir, Turkey.

AIM: It has been demonstrated that long-term oxygen therapy increased exercise 
capacity, improved the quality of life, reduced hospitalization and increased 
life expectancy in chronic hypoxemic COPD patients. The present study aims to 
evaluate the effectiveness of pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) in COPD patients 
receiving long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) compared to COPD patients not 
receiving LTOT.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Chronic hypoxemic COPD patients using LTOT (LTOT group) 
and COPD patients not receiving LTOT (non-LTOT group) who participated in this 
study underwent a comprehensive 8-week outpatient PR program.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven out of 61 severe/very severe cases with COPD received LTOT 
at home, and 34 did not. After PR, 6-minute walking distance (6mWD) increased 
significantly and perceived dyspnea decreased significantly in both groups 
(P < .001, both). This change was significantly higher in the LTOT-receiving 
group compared to the non-LTOT Group (P = .046, P = .012). In both groups, all 
items in the disease-related quality of life questionnaire (QoL) were improved, 
and the scores in the health-related QoL questionnaire exhibited an improvement 
(P < .05, for all). Anxiety and depression scores were significantly lowered in 
both groups (P < .05, both).
CONCLUSIONS: Those COPD patients receiving the LTOT benefited from the PR as 
much as those COPD patients not receiving LTOT. The former group had a higher 
increase in 6mWD and a higher reduction in dyspnea symptoms. Further studies are 
required to understand to what extent the severe chronic hypoxemic COPD patients 
could benefit from the PR.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.12680
PMID: 28776954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Chest. 2018 Jun;153(6):1499-1500. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.03.053.

COPD Home Oxygen Therapy and Home Mechanical Ventilation: Improving 
Admission-Free Survival in Persistent Hypercapnic COPD.

Criner GJ(1), Dreher M(2), Hart N(3), Murphy P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA. Electronic address: 
gerard.criner@tuhs.temple.edu.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Pneumology, Angiology, and Intensive Care, 
University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(3)St. Thomas' Hospital, Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.

As seen in this CME online activity (available at 
http://journal.cme.chestnet.org/copd-hot-hmv), acute exacerbations of COPD are 
associated with significant levels of morbidity and mortality. Acute noninvasive 
ventilation has been demonstrated its clinical efficacy and cost-effectiveness 
in reducing intubation rate and mortality and in patients with acute 
decompensated hypercapnic exacerbations of COPD. However, those patients with 
evidence of chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure have worse long-term 
outcomes compared with patients who have only transient hypercapnia during the 
acute phase returning to eucapnia in the recovery stage. Indeed, there are 
limited options available to improve the clinical outcome in these COPD patients 
with persistent hypercapnia. The Home Oxygen Therapy-Home Mechanical Ventilation 
(HOT-HMV) trial investigated admission-free survival in patients with persistent 
hypercapnia following a life-threatening exacerbation requiring acute 
noninvasive ventilation. Phenotyping patients to ensure chronic hypercapnia 
enriched the trial population to identify those patients at highest risk of 
readmission or death following an exacerbation. The addition of home noninvasive 
ventilation to home oxygen therapy in patients with persistent hypercapnia led 
to improved admission-free survival. The noninvasive ventilation was titrated to 
overnight measures of transcutaneous CO2 to achieve control of nocturnal 
hypoventilation, which improved daytime chronic respiratory failure. Home 
noninvasive ventilation is a complex intervention requiring a multidisciplinary 
team and long-term patient follow-up to maximize the clinical benefit to the 
patient.

Crown Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.03.053
PMID: 29884255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nihon Rinsho. 2016 May;74(5):794-800.

[Home oxygen therapy and noninvasive ventilation for stable COPD].

[Article in Japanese]

Tachikawa R, Chin K.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the most common underlying 
disease of home oxygen therapy (HOT) and long-term noninvasive ventilation (NIV) 
in Japan. Although both have been increasingly used for stable COPD in clinical 
practice, there are numerous questions to be resolved with regard to the 
indication of these therapies. Here we briefly reviewed current indication and 
available evidence of HOT and long-term NIV for stable COPD. We also outline 
research agenda that should be investigated in future studies.

PMID: 27254949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Respir Care. 2018 Jan;63(1):11-19. doi: 10.4187/respcare.05487. Epub 2017 Oct 3.

Perceived Satisfaction With Long-Term Oxygen Delivery Devices Affects Perceived 
Mobility and Quality of Life of Oxygen-Dependent Individuals With COPD.

Mussa CC(1), Tonyan L(2), Chen YF(3), Vines D(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Care, Department of Cardiopulmonary Sciences, Rush 
University Medical Center, College of Health Sciences, Chicago, Illinois. 
Constance_Mussa@rush.edu.
(2)Ascension Health, All Saints Hospital, Racine, Wisconsin.
(3)Center for Clinical and Translational Science, University of Illinois, 
Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Division of Respiratory Care, Department of Cardiopulmonary Sciences, Rush 
University Medical Center, College of Health Sciences, Chicago, Illinois.

Comment in
    Respir Care. 2018 Jan;63(1):121-122.

BACKGROUND: Although routine physical activity for individuals with COPD is 
recommended, there are inherent limitations of available oxygen delivery devices 
that may result in hypoxemia during activity. Changes in Medicare laws have 
resulted in an increased use of oxygen cylinders and a reduction in the use of 
liquid oxygen devices. The aim of this survey was to assess the impact of 
perceived satisfaction with various oxygen delivery devices on perceived 
mobility and quality of life (QOL) of oxygen-dependent subjects with COPD.
METHODS: A survey was developed to measure perceived satisfaction with current 
portable oxygen delivery devices, perceived mobility, and perceived QOL. The 
survey was deployed via a link posted on the COPD Foundation's COPD360SOCIAL 
social media site for 5 weeks, which resulted in the recruitment of 529 
participants, of which 417 were included in the data analysis.
RESULTS: Quantile regression analysis revealed that the median perceived device 
satisfaction score was significantly higher in the liquid oxygen device group (P 
< .001) compared with the portable oxygen cylinder and portable oxygen 
concentrator (POC) groups. The median perceived mobility score was significantly 
higher in the liquid oxygen device group (P < .001) compared with the portable 
oxygen cylinder group, but not the POC group. The median QOL score was 
significantly higher in the liquid oxygen device group (P < .001) compared with 
the POC and portable oxygen cylinder groups. Moreover, partial least-squares 
structural equation modeling regression analysis showed that perceived mobility 
is significantly affected by perceived satisfaction with the long-term oxygen 
therapy (LTOT) device (adjusted R2 = 0.15, P < .001), and perceived QOL is 
significantly affected by both perceived satisfaction with the LTOT device and 
perceived mobility (adjusted R2 = 0.45, P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: For individuals with COPD requiring LTOT, perceived satisfaction 
with a portable LTOT device significantly and positively affects perceived 
mobility and QOL.

Copyright © 2018 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.05487
PMCID: PMC6822580
PMID: 28974643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Mr Vines has disclosed relationships with 
Aerogen, Bayer Healthcare, Boehringer Ingelheim, Carefusion, Covidien-Medtronic, 
Halyard, Salter Labs, and Teleflex. The other authors have disclosed no 
conflicts of interest.


30. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 20;11(9):e0163293. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163293. 
eCollection 2016.

Long-Term Oxygen Therapy 24 vs 15 h/day and Mortality in Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease.

Ahmadi Z(1), Sundh J(2), Bornefalk-Hermansson A(3), Ekström M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Respiratory Medicine & 
Allergology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, School of Medical Sciences, Örebro 
University, Örebro, Sweden.
(3)Department of Statistics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) ≥ 15 h/day improves survival in hypoxemic 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). LTOT 24 h/day is often recommended 
but may pose an unnecessary burden with no clear survival benefit compared with 
LTOT 15 h/day. The aim was to test the hypothesis that LTOT 24 h/day decreases 
all-cause, respiratory, and cardiovascular mortality compared to LTOT 15 h/day 
in hypoxemic COPD. This was a prospective, observational, population-based study 
of COPD patients starting LTOT between October 1, 2005 and June 30, 2009 in 
Sweden. Overall and cause-specific mortality was analyzed using Cox and 
Fine-Gray regression, controlling for age, sex, prescribed oxygen dose, PaO2 
(air), PaCO2 (air), Forced Expiratory Volume in one second (FEV1), WHO 
performance status, body mass index, comorbidity, and oral glucocorticoids. A 
total of 2,249 included patients were included with a median follow-up of 1.1 
years (interquartile range, 0.6-2.1). 1,129 (50%) patients died and no patient 
was lost to follow-up. Higher LTOT duration analyzed as a continuous variable 
was not associated with any change in mortality rate (hazard ratio [HR] 1.00; 
(95% confidence interval [CI], 0.98 to 1.02) per 1 h/day increase above 15 
h/day. LTOT exactly 24 h/day was prescribed in 539 (24%) patients and LTOT 15-16 
h/day in 1,231 (55%) patients. Mortality was similar between the groups for 
all-cause, respiratory and cardiovascular mortality. In hypoxemic COPD, LTOT 24 
h/day was not associated with a survival benefit compared with treatment 15-16 
h/day. A design for a registry-based randomized trial (R-RCT) is proposed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163293
PMCID: PMC5029935
PMID: 27649490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


31. BMC Pulm Med. 2017 Jan 9;17(1):8. doi: 10.1186/s12890-016-0343-9.

Multi-center, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of nocturnal oxygen therapy 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a study protocol for the INOX trial.

Lacasse Y(1), Bernard S(2), Sériès F(2), Nguyen VH(2), Bourbeau J(3), Aaron 
S(4), Maltais F(2); International Nocturnal Oxygen (INOX) Research Group.

Collaborators: Mallet M, Bourbeau J, Paradis B, Maltais F, Lecours R, Larivée P, 
Baltzan M, Corbeil F, Drapeau C, Cournoyer G, Aaron S, O'Donnell D, Shepertecky 
M, Wong E, Road J, Simão P, Guimarães M, Bárbara C, Pinto P, Moita J, Rodrigues 
C, Munhá J, Valente S, Santaolalla CJ, Fernández AA, Cano I, Catalán JS, Esteban 
C, Garcia-Loizaga A, Meurice JC, Palot A, Chanez P, Gonzalez J, Guerder A.

Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche, Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie 
de Québec (IUCPQ), 2725 Chemin Ste-Foy, Québec, Québec, G1V 4G5, Canada. 
yves.lacasse@med.ulaval.ca.
(2)Centre de recherche, Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie 
de Québec (IUCPQ), 2725 Chemin Ste-Foy, Québec, Québec, G1V 4G5, Canada.
(3)Institut thoracique de Montréal, 3650 rue St-Urbain, Montréal, Québec, H2X 
2P4, Canada.
(4)The Ottawa Hospital - General Campus, Mailbox 211, 501 Smyth Road, Ottawa, 
ON, K1H 8L6, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) is the only component of the 
management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that improves 
survival in patients with severe daytime hypoxemia. LTOT is usually provided by 
a stationary oxygen concentrator and is recommended to be used for at least 
15-18 h a day. Several studies have demonstrated a deterioration in arterial 
blood gas pressures and oxygen saturation during sleep in patients with COPD, 
even in those not qualifying for LTOT. The suggestion has been made that the 
natural progression of COPD to its end stages of chronic pulmonary hypertension, 
severe hypoxemia, right heart failure, and death is dependent upon the severity 
of desaturation occurring during sleep. The primary objective of the 
International Nocturnal Oxygen (INOX) trial is to determine, in patients with 
COPD not qualifying for LTOT but who present significant nocturnal arterial 
oxygen desaturation, whether nocturnal oxygen provided for a period of 3 years 
decreases mortality or delay the prescription of LTOT.
METHODS: The INOX trial is a 3-year, multi-center, placebo-controlled, 
randomized trial of nocturnal oxygen therapy added to usual care. Eligible 
patients are those with a diagnosis of COPD supported by a history of past 
smoking and obstructive disease who fulfill our definition of significant 
nocturnal oxygen desaturation (i.e., ≥ 30% of the recording time with 
transcutaneous arterial oxygen saturation < 90% on either of two consecutive 
recordings). Patients allocated in the control group receive room air delivered 
by a concentrator modified to deliver 21% oxygen. The comparison is double 
blind. The primary outcome is a composite of mortality from all cause or 
requirement for LTOT. Secondary outcomes include quality of life and utility 
measures, costs from a societal perspective and compliance with oxygen therapy. 
The follow-up period is intended to last at least 3 years.
DISCUSSION: The benefits of LTOT have been demonstrated whereas those of 
nocturnal oxygen therapy alone have not. The INOX trial will likely determine 
whether supplemental oxygen during sleep is effective in reducing mortality, 
delaying the need for LTOT and improving health-related quality of life in 
patients with COPD who desaturate overnight.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN50085100 ; 
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01044628 (date of registration: January 6, 2010).

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-016-0343-9
PMCID: PMC5223547
PMID: 28069009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Aug 24;11:1983-90. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S112820. eCollection 2016.

Automated oxygen titration and weaning with FreeO2 in patients with acute 
exacerbation of COPD: a pilot randomized trial.

Lellouche F(1), Bouchard PA(1), Roberge M(1), Simard S(2), L'Her E(3), Maltais 
F(1), Lacasse Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre.
(2)Research Centre; Biostatistics Department, Quebec Heart and Lung Institute, 
Laval University.
(3)Research Centre; Emergency Medicine, Hôtel-Dieu de Lévis, Laval University, 
Quebec City, QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Apr 03;12 :1057-1060.

INTRODUCTION: We developed a device (FreeO2) that automatically adjusts the 
oxygen flow rates based on patients' needs, in order to limit hyperoxia and 
hypoxemia and to automatically wean them from oxygen.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of using FreeO2 
in patients hospitalized in the respiratory ward for an acute exacerbation of 
COPD.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized controlled trial comparing FreeO2 vs manual 
oxygen titration in the respiratory ward of a university hospital. We measured 
the perception of appropriateness of oxygen titration and monitoring in both 
groups by nurses and attending physicians using a Likert scale. We evaluated the 
time in the target range of oxygen saturation (SpO2) as defined for each patient 
by the attending physician, the time with severe desaturation (SpO2 <85%), and 
the time with hyperoxia (SpO2 >5% above the target). We also recorded length of 
stay, intensive care unit admissions, and readmission rate. Fifty patients were 
randomized (25 patients in both groups; mean age: 72±8 years; mean forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second: 1.00±0.49 L; and mean initial O2 flow 2.0±1.0 
L/min).
RESULTS: Nurses and attending physicians felt that oxygen titration and 
monitoring were equally appropriate with both O2 administration systems. The 
percentage of time within the SpO2 target was significantly higher with FreeO2, 
and the time with severe desaturation and hyperoxia was significantly reduced 
with FreeO2. Time from study inclusion to hospital discharge was 5.8±4.4 days 
with FreeO2 and 8.4±6.0 days with usual oxygen administration (P=0.051).
CONCLUSION: FreeO2 was deemed as an appropriate oxygen administration system by 
nurses and physicians of a respiratory unit. This system maintained SpO2 at the 
target level better than did manual titration and reduced periods of 
desaturation and hyperoxia. Our results also suggest that FreeO2 has the 
potential to reduce the hospital length of stay.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S112820
PMCID: PMC5003517
PMID: 27601891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Respir Care. 2019 Mar;64(3):272-278. doi: 10.4187/respcare.06303. Epub 2018 Nov 
6.

Post-Hospitalization Short-Term Oxygen Therapy: Use of a Clinical Management 
Pathway and Long-Term Follow-Up.

Khor YH(1), Wong R(2), McDonald CF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Austin Health, Heidelberg, 
Victoria, Australia, and Institute for Breathing and Sleep, Heidelberg, 
Victoria, Australia. yethong.khor@austin.org.au.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Austin Health, Heidelberg, 
Victoria, Australia, and Institute for Breathing and Sleep, Heidelberg, 
Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Home oxygen therapy is commonly prescribed for patients who remain 
hypoxemic at hospital discharge, although evidence supporting this practice is 
lacking. This study aimed to evaluate oxygen prescription and follow-up for 
patients who were prescribed post-discharge short-term oxygen therapy (STOT) and 
to assess their long-term outcome.
METHODS: A retrospective audit was undertaken of subjects prescribed STOT 
following hospitalization at a single site in Melbourne, Australia, between 
January 2011 and December 2015. During the study period, a designated clinical 
pathway for STOT prescription and follow-up after hospital discharge was in 
place. Chart review was performed to collect subject demographics and 
comorbidities, results of oxygen assessment (arterial blood gas and 6-min walk 
tests) and prescription, and results at follow-up re-assessment and mortality.
RESULTS: Over five 5 years, 205 subjects were prescribed STOT upon hospital 
discharge. Common indications for oxygen treatment were chronic lung disease 
(54%) and dyspnea palliation (26%). Of the 152 subjects who were discharged with 
non-palliative oxygen therapy, 28% did not fulfil the recommended prescribing 
criteria or did not have recommended assessments. Among the 118 subjects who 
returned for re-assessment 4 weeks after initial oxygen provision, 47 (40%) did 
not fulfill criteria for long-term oxygen therapy. The 1-y cumulative survival 
rate for the study population was 56%.
CONCLUSIONS: A significant proportion of subjects who were prescribed 
post-discharge STOT did not fulfill the recommended prescribing criteria. The 
long-term prognosis for subjects who were prescribed post-discharge STOT was 
poor.

Copyright © 2019 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.06303
PMID: 30401753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Mar 22;13:979-988. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S154749. eCollection 2018.

Long-term oxygen therapy in COPD patients: population-based cohort study on 
mortality.

Pavlov N(1), Haynes AG(2)(3), Stucki A(4), Jüni P(5), Ott SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University Hospital (Inselspital), 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)CTU Bern, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine (ISPM), University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Spital Thun, Thun, Switzerland.
(5)Applied Health Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St 
Michael's Hospital, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.

PURPOSE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the fourth leading 
cause of death worldwide and is associated with a growing and substantial 
socioeconomic burden. Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT), recommended by current 
treatment guidelines for COPD patients with severe chronic hypoxemia, has shown 
to reduce mortality in this population. The aim of our study was to assess the 
standardized mortality ratios of incident and prevalent LTOT users and to 
identify predictors of mortality.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a 2-year follow-up population-based cohort 
study comprising all COPD patients receiving LTOT in the canton of Bern, 
Switzerland. Comparing age- and sex-adjusted standardized mortality ratios, we 
examined associations between all-cause mortality and patient characteristics at 
baseline. To avoid immortal time bias, data for incident (receiving LTOT <6 
months) and prevalent users were analyzed separately.
RESULTS: At baseline, 475 patients (20% incident users, n=93) were receiving 
LTOT because of COPD (48/100,000 inhabitants). Mortality of incident and 
prevalent LTOT users was 41% versus 27%, respectively, p<0.007, and standardized 
mortality ratios were 8.02 (95% CI: 5.64-11.41) versus 5.90 (95% CI: 4.79-7.25), 
respectively. Type 2 respiratory failure was associated with higher standardized 
mortality ratios among incident LTOT users (60.57, 95% CI: 11.82-310.45, 
p=0.038).
CONCLUSION: Two-year mortality rate of COPD patients on incident LTOT was 
somewhat lower in our study than in older cohorts but remained high compared to 
the general population, especially in younger patients receiving LTOT <6 months. 
Type 2 respiratory failure was associated with mortality.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S154749
PMCID: PMC5868621
PMID: 29606865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


35. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Nov 25;11(11):CD006429. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD006429.pub3.

Oxygen for breathlessness in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
who do not qualify for home oxygen therapy.

Ekström M(1), Ahmadi Z, Bornefalk-Hermansson A, Abernethy A, Currow D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Respiratory Medicine & 
Allergology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Jun 15;(6):CD006429.

BACKGROUND: Breathlessness is a cardinal symptom of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) is given to improve 
survival time in people with COPD and severe chronic hypoxaemia at rest. The 
efficacy of oxygen therapy for breathlessness and health-related quality of life 
(HRQOL) in people with COPD and mild or no hypoxaemia who do not meet the 
criteria for LTOT has not been established.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the efficacy of oxygen versus air in mildly hypoxaemic 
or non-hypoxaemic patients with COPD in terms of (1) breathlessness; (2) HRQOL; 
(3) patient preference whether to continue therapy; and (4) oxygen-related 
adverse events.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Register, the Cochrane 
Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE and Embase, to 12 July 
2016, for randomised controlled trials (RCTs). We handsearched the reference 
lists of included articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs of the effects of non-invasive oxygen 
versus air on breathlessness, HRQOL or patient preference to continue therapy 
among people with COPD and mild or no hypoxaemia (partial pressure of oxygen 
(PaO2) > 7.3 kPa) who were not already receiving LTOT. Two review authors 
independently assessed articles for inclusion in the review.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently collected and 
analysed data. We assessed risk of bias by using the Cochrane 'Risk of bias 
tool'. We pooled effects recorded on different scales as standardised mean 
differences (SMDs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) using random-effects 
models. Lower SMDs indicated decreased breathlessness and reduced HRQOL. We 
performed subanalyses and sensitivity analyses and assessed the quality of 
evidence according to the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development 
and Evaluations (GRADE) approach.
MAIN RESULTS: Compared with the previous review, which was published in 2011, we 
included 14 additional studies (493 participants), excluded one study and 
included data for meta-analysis of HRQOL. In total, we included in this review 
44 studies including 1195 participants, and we included 33 of these (901 
participants)in the meta-analysis.We found that breathlessness during exercise 
or daily activities was reduced by oxygen compared with air (32 studies; 865 
participants; SMD -0.34, 95% CI -0.48 to -0.21; I2 = 37%; low-quality evidence). 
This translates to a decrease in breathlessness of about 0.7 points on a 0 to 10 
numerical rating scale. In contrast, we found no effect of short-burst oxygen 
given before exercise (four studies; 90 participants; SMD 0.01, 95% CI -0.26 to 
0.28; I2 = 0%; low-quality evidence). Oxygen reduced breathlessness measured 
during exercise tests (25 studies; 442 participants; SMD -0.34, 95% CI -0.46 to 
-0.22; I2 = 29%; moderate-quality evidence), whereas evidence of an effect on 
breathlessness measured in daily life was limited (two studies; 274 
participants; SMD -0.13, 95% CI, -0.37 to 0.11; I2 = 0%; low-quality 
evidence).Oxygen did not clearly affect HRQOL (five studies; 267 participants; 
SMD 0.10, 95% CI -0.06 to 0.26; I2 = 0%; low-quality evidence). Patient 
preference and adverse events could not be analysed owing to insufficient data.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We are moderately confident that oxygen can relieve 
breathlessness when given during exercise to mildly hypoxaemic and 
non-hypoxaemic people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who would not 
otherwise qualify for home oxygen therapy. Most evidence pertains to acute 
effects during exercise tests, and no evidence indicates that oxygen decreases 
breathlessness in the daily life setting. Findings show that oxygen does not 
affect health-related quality of life.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006429.pub3
PMCID: PMC6464154
PMID: 27886372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ME, ZA, ABH and DC declare no conflicts of 
interest relevant to this work. AA is the Chief Medical Officer and Chief 
Scientific Officer at Flatiron Health, a cancer‐focused health technology 
company in New York, New York, USA. Collaborators and end‐users of the dataset 
and Flatiron's research & analytics services include academic researchers, 
pharmaceutical manufacturers and government users, including the US FDA. 
Investors in Flatiron include three pharmaceutical manufacturers (Roche, Amgen, 
Celgene), but these venture investments do not relate to any drug products. 
These companies have no specific data rights and no say in the day‐to‐day 
research activities at Flatiron.


36. Rev Med Interne. 2019 Oct;40(10):670-676. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2019.04.003. 
Epub 2019 May 1.

Benefits and risks of oxygen therapy during acute medical illness: Just a matter 
of dose!

Allardet-Servent J(1), Sicard G(2), Metz V(3), Chiche L(4).

Author information:
(1)Service de réanimation, Hôpital Européen Marseille, 6, rue Désirée Clary, 
13003 Marseille, France. Electronic address: 
j.allardetservent@hopital-europeen.fr.
(2)Service de pharmacie, Hôpital Européen Marseille, 13003 Marseille, France; 
SMARTc, faculté de pharmacie, 13003 Marseille, France.
(3)Service de pharmacie, Hôpital Européen Marseille, 13003 Marseille, France.
(4)Unité de médecine interne et recherche clinique, Hôpital Européen Marseille, 
13885 Marseille cedex 5, France.

Oxygen therapy is used to reverse hypoxemia since more than a century. Current 
usage is broader and includes routine oxygen administration despite normoxemia 
which may result in prolonged periods of hyperoxemia. While systematic oxygen 
therapy was expected to be of benefit in some ischemic diseases such as stroke 
or acute myocardial infarction, recent randomised controlled trials (RCTs) have 
challenged this hypothesis by showing the absence of clinical improvement. 
Although oxygen is known to be toxic at high inspired oxygen fractions, a recent 
meta-analysis of RCTs revealed the life-threatening effect of hyperoxemia, with 
a dose-dependent relationship. Several recommendations have therefore been 
updated: (i) to monitor peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) as a surrogate for 
arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2); (ii) to initiate oxygen only when the lower 
SpO2 threshold is crossed; (iii) to titrate the delivered oxygen fraction to 
maintain SpO2 within a target range; and (iv) to stop supplying oxygen when the 
upper limit of SpO2 is surpassed, in order to prevent hyperoxemia. The lower and 
upper limits of SpO2 depend on the presence of risk factors for oxygen-induced 
hypercapnia (Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, and 
obesity-associated hypoventilation). For patients at risk, oxygen therapy should 
be started when SpO2 is≤88% and stopped when it is>92%. For patients without 
risk factors, oxygen therapy should be started when SpO2 is≤92% and stopped when 
it is >96%. High-flow oxygen should only be used in a few diseases such as 
carbon monoxide poisoning, cluster headaches, sickle cell crisis and 
pneumothorax.

Copyright © 2019 Société Nationale Française de Médecine Interne (SNFMI). 
Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2019.04.003
PMID: 31054779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Med Case Rep. 2017 Jul 28;11(1):204. doi: 10.1186/s13256-017-1363-7.

Carbon dioxide narcosis due to inappropriate oxygen delivery: a case report.

Herren T(1)(2), Achermann E(3)(4), Hegi T(5), Reber A(6)(7), Stäubli M(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)University of Zurich, Medical Faculty, Zurich, Switzerland. 
thomas.herren@spital-limmattal.ch.
(2)Department of Medicine, Limmattal Hospital, 100 Urdorferstrasse, Schlieren, 
ZH, 8952, Switzerland. thomas.herren@spital-limmattal.ch.
(3)University of Zurich, Medical Faculty, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Medicine, Limmattal Hospital, 100 Urdorferstrasse, Schlieren, 
ZH, 8952, Switzerland.
(5)Institute of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Limmattal Hospital, 100 
Urdorferstrasse, Schlieren, ZH, 8952, Switzerland.
(6)University of Basel, Medical Faculty, Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Zollikerberg Hospital, 20 
Trichtenhauser Strasse, Zollikerberg, ZH, 8125, Switzerland.
(8)University of Bern, Medical Faculty, Bern, Switzerland.
(9)Verein Komplikationenliste, Swiss Society of General Internal Medicine, 4 
Lebernhöhe, Ebmatingen, ZH, 8125, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Oxygen delivery to patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease may be challenging because of their potential hypoxic ventilatory drive. 
However, some oxygen delivery systems such as non-rebreathing face masks with an 
oxygen reservoir bag require high oxygen flow for adequate oxygenation and to 
avoid carbon dioxide rebreathing.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 72-year-old Caucasian man with severe chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease was admitted to the emergency department because of worsening 
dyspnea and an oxygen saturation of 81% measured by pulse oximetry. Oxygen was 
administered using a non-rebreathing mask with an oxygen reservoir bag attached. 
For fear of removing the hypoxic stimulus to respiration the oxygen flow was 
inappropriately limited to 4L/minute. The patient developed carbon dioxide 
narcosis and had to be intubated and mechanically ventilated.
CONCLUSIONS: Non-rebreathing masks with oxygen reservoir bags must be fed with 
an oxygen flow exceeding the patient's minute ventilation (>6-10 L/minute.). If 
not, the amount of oxygen delivered will be too small to effectively increase 
the arterial oxygen saturation. Moreover, the risk of carbon dioxide rebreathing 
dramatically increases if the flow of oxygen to a non-rebreathing mask is lower 
than the minute ventilation, especially in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease and low tidal volumes. Non-rebreathing masks (with oxygen 
reservoir bags) must be used cautiously by experienced medical staff and with an 
appropriately high oxygen flow of 10-15 L/minute. Nevertheless, arterial blood 
gases must be analyzed regularly for early detection of a rise in partial 
pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease ﻿and a hypoxic ventilatory drive. These patients 
are more safely managed using a nasal cannula with an oxygen flow of 1-2L/minute 
or a simple face mask with an oxygen flow of 5L/minute.

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-017-1363-7
PMCID: PMC5532777
PMID: 28750686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHORS’ INFORMATION: MS is President of the 
Verein Komplikationenliste. Under the auspices of the Swiss Society of General 
Internal Medicine the Verein Komplikationenliste uses a program for the 
anonymous, systematic and prospective registration of iatrogenic complications 
of medical interventions in hospitalized patients in Switzerland. The patient 
reported was part of this registry. ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Involvement of the ethics committee of the Canton of Zurich was not considered 
necessary, since the writing of a case report was not based on a study protocol, 
and is not classified as research by the Swiss Federal Act on Research on Human 
Beings. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent was obtained from the 
patient’s next-of-kin for publication of this case report and all accompanying 
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor of 
this journal. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no 
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


38. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 29;10:2087-94. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S88326. eCollection 2015.

Assessment of cognitive impairment in long-term oxygen therapy-dependent COPD 
patients.

Karamanli H(1), Ilik F(2), Kayhan F(3), Pazarli AC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Mevlana University, Konya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mevlana University, Konya, Turkey.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Mevlana University, Konya, 
Turkey.
(4)Department of Pulmonology, Elbistan State Hospital, Elbistan, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: A number of studies have shown that COPD, particularly in its later 
and more severe stages, is associated with various cognitive deficits. Thus, the 
primary goal of the present study was to elucidate the extent of cognitive 
impairment in patients with long-term oxygen therapy-dependent (LTOTD) COPD. In 
addition, this study aimed to determine the effectiveness of two cognitive 
screening tests, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), for COPD patients and the ability of oxygen therapy 
to mitigate COPD-related deficits in cognitive function.
METHODS: The present study enrolled 45 subjects: 24 nonuser and 21 regular-user 
LTOTD-COPD patients. All subjects had a similar grade of education, and there 
were no significant differences regarding age or sex. The MoCA (cutoff: <26 
points) and MMSE (cutoff: ≤24 points) scores were compared between these two 
groups.
RESULTS: The nonuser LTOTD-COPD group had a significantly lower MoCA score than 
that of the regular-user LTOTD-COPD group (19.38±2.99 vs 21.68±2.14, 
respectively) as well as a significantly lower MMSE score. Moreover, the absence 
of supplemental oxygen therapy increased the risk of cognitive impairment (MoCA, 
P=0.007 and MMSE, P=0.014), and the MoCA and MMSE scores significantly 
correlated with the number of emergency admissions and the number of 
hospitalizations in the last year.
CONCLUSION: In the present study, the nonuser LTOTD-COPD group exhibited a 
significant decrease in cognitive status compared with the regular-user 
LTOTD-COPD group. This suggests that the assessment of cognitive function in 
nonuser LTOTD-COPD patients and the use of protective strategies, such as 
continuous supplemental oxygen treatment, should be considered during the 
management of COPD in this population. In addition, the MoCA score was superior 
to the MMSE score for the determination of cognitive impairment in the nonuser 
LTOTD-COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S88326
PMCID: PMC4598205
PMID: 26491279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jan 5;12:193-197. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S119949. eCollection 2017.

Burn injury during long-term oxygen therapy in Denmark and Sweden: the potential 
role of smoking.

Tanash HA(1), Ringbaek T(2), Huss F(3), Ekström M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Skåne University Hospital, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Respiratory Department, Hvidovre Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Surgical Sciences, Plastic Surgery; Department of Plastic and 
Maxillofacial Surgery, Burn Center, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, 
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) increases life expectancy in 
patients with COPD and severe hypoxemia. Smoking is the main cause of burn 
injury during LTOT. Policy regarding smoking while on LTOT varies between 
countries. In this study, we compare the incidence of burn injury that required 
contact with a health care specialist, between Sweden (a country with a strict 
policy regarding smoking while on LTOT) and Denmark (a country with less strict 
smoking policy).
METHODS: This was a population-based, cohort study of patients initiating LTOT 
due to any cause in Sweden and Denmark. Data on diagnoses, external causes, and 
procedures were obtained from the Swedish and Danish National Patient Registers 
for inpatient and outpatient care. Patients were followed from January 1, 2000, 
until the first of the following: LTOT withdrawal, death, or study end (December 
31, 2009). The primary end point was burn injury during LTOT.
RESULTS: A total of 23,741 patients received LTOT in Denmark and 7,754 patients 
in Sweden. Most patients started LTOT due to COPD, both in Sweden (74%) and in 
Denmark (62%). The rate of burn injury while on LTOT was higher in Denmark than 
in Sweden; 170 (95% confidence interval [CI], 126-225) vs 85 (95% CI, 44-148) 
per 100,000 person-years; rate ratio 2.0 (95% CI, 1.0-4.1). The risk remained 
higher after adjustment for gender, age, and diagnosis in multivariate Cox 
regression, hazard ratio 1.8 (95% CI, 1.0-3.5). Thirty-day mortality after burn 
injury was 8% in both countries.
CONCLUSION: Compared to Sweden, the rate of burn injury was twice as high in 
Denmark where smoking is not a contraindication for prescribing LTOT.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S119949
PMCID: PMC5230731
PMID: 28123292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the 
paper.


40. Respirology. 2017 Aug;22(6):1149-1155. doi: 10.1111/resp.13050. Epub 2017 May 4.

Physiological effects of titrated oxygen via nasal high-flow cannulae in COPD 
exacerbations: A randomized controlled cross-over trial.

Pilcher J(1)(2)(3), Eastlake L(1), Richards M(1), Power S(1)(3), Cripps T(1)(3), 
Bibby S(1)(3), Braithwaite I(1)(2)(3), Weatherall M(4), Beasley R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Clinical Research, Victoria University of Wellington School of 
Biological Science, Wellington, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Medicine, Capital and Coast District Health Board, Wellington, 
New Zealand.
(4)University of Otago Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand.

Comment in
    Respirology. 2017 Aug;22(6):1049-1050.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Increased arterial carbon dioxide tension (PaCO2 ) is 
an important complication of acute exacerbations of COPD. The effects of nasal 
high-flow cannulae (NHF) on PaCO2 in patients with COPD exacerbations, and 
whether this therapy should be used in this clinical situation, are less 
certain. We aimed to investigate the effect of NHF on PaCO2 in patients admitted 
to hospital with a COPD exacerbation.
METHODS: We performed a single-centre randomized controlled cross-over trial in 
24 hospital inpatients with acute exacerbations of COPD receiving oxygen via 
standard nasal prongs (SNPs). Patients received both supplemental oxygen via NHF 
(35 L/min) and SNP for 30 min each, with oxygen titrated to maintain the 
patient's baseline oxygen saturation, measured by pulse oximetry (SpO2 ). 
Interventions were administered in random order with a minimum 15-min washout 
between interventions. The primary outcome was difference in transcutaneous 
carbon dioxide tension (PtCO2 ) at 30 min adjusted for time zero.
RESULTS: The difference in PtCO2 adjusted for time zero was lower after 30 min 
for NHF compared with SNP (-1.4 mm Hg (95% CI: -2.2 to -0.6), P = 0.001). There 
was no difference in SpO2 at 30 min (-0.02% (95% CI: -0.8 to 0.7), P = 0.96). 
The reduction in respiratory rate for NHF at 30 min was not statistically 
significant (-2.0 breaths/min (95% CI: -4.5 to 0.4), P = 0.099).
CONCLUSION: Short-term use of NHF results in a small reduction in PtCO2 compared 
with SNP in patients with acute exacerbations of COPD, but whether this is 
clinically significant is uncertain.

© 2017 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13050
PMID: 28470831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Respirology. 2019 Nov;24(11):1081-1087. doi: 10.1111/resp.13575. Epub 2019 May 
13.

Nasal high-flow therapy compared with non-invasive ventilation in COPD patients 
with chronic respiratory failure: A randomized controlled cross-over trial.

McKinstry S(1)(2)(3), Singer J(1), Baarsma JP(1)(4), Weatherall M(3)(5), Beasley 
R(1)(2)(3), Fingleton J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand.
(2)Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand.
(3)Capital and Coast District Health Board, Wellington, New Zealand.
(4)University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)University of Otago Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand.

Comment in
    Respirology. 2019 Nov;24(11):1039-1041.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Non-invasive ventilation (NIV) is part of the standard 
of care for hypercapnic respiratory failure secondary to COPD, but may be poorly 
tolerated. Preliminary evidence suggests nasal high-flow (NHF) therapy may 
improve hypercapnia in COPD and be well tolerated. We compared NHF and NIV in 
people with COPD and chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure.
METHODS: Single-blind randomized controlled two-way cross-over single-centre 
trial was conducted in New Zealand. Twenty-four participants with stable 
hypercapnic COPD received: NHF at 45 L/min and NIV at 15/4 cm H2 O, each for 
60 min with a 15-min washout in between. The primary outcome was transcutaneous 
partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PtCO2 ) at 60 min, adjusted for baseline.
RESULTS: NIV reduced the PtCO2 more than NHF (mean (SD) at 60 min by -5.3 (5.0) 
vs -2.5 (3.5) mm Hg; difference: -2.8 (-5.0 to -0.5) P = 0.021). Difference 
across all time points was -2.5 mm Hg (95% CI -4.5 to -0.5, P = 0.016). There 
was no significant difference in the proportion of participants with a reduction 
of PtCO2  ≥ 4 or ≥ 8 mm Hg. Participants rated NHF significantly better for ease 
of application, comfort and fit.
CONCLUSION: In stable COPD patients with chronic hypercapnia, NIV resulted in a 
greater reduction in PtCO2 compared with NHF, which was of uncertain clinical 
significance. NHF was better tolerated than NIV and may be a therapeutic option 
for some people with hypercapnic respiratory failure.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ACTRN12616001701415 at www.anzctr.org.au.

© 2019 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13575
PMID: 31083777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Rev Bras Ter Intensiva. 2019 May 23;31(2):156-163. doi: 
10.5935/0103-507X.20190026.

Efficacy and safety of high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy in moderate acute 
hypercapnic respiratory failure.

Yuste ME(1), Moreno O(1), Narbona S(1), Acosta F(1), Peñas L(1), Colmenero 
M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Unidade de Terapia Intensiva, Hospital Universitário San Cecilio - Granada, 
Espanha.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria - Granada, Espanha.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and safety of high-flow nasal cannula oxygen 
therapy in treating moderate hypercapnic respiratory failure in patients who 
cannot tolerate or have contraindications to noninvasive mechanical ventilation.
METHODS: A prospective observational 13-month study involving subjects admitted 
to an intensive care unit with or developing moderate hypercapnic respiratory 
failure. Clinical and gas exchange parameters were recorded at regular intervals 
during the first 24 hours. The endpoints were a oxygen saturation between 88 and 
92% along with a reduction in breathing effort (respiratory rate) and pH 
normalization (≥ 7.35). Subjects were considered nonresponders if they required 
ventilatory support.
RESULTS: Thirty subjects were treated with high-flow nasal cannula oxygen 
therapy. They consisted of a mixed population with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease exacerbation, acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema, and postoperative and 
postextubation respiratory failure. A nonsignificant improvement was observed in 
respiratory rate (28.0 ± 0.9 versus 24.3 ± 1.5, p = 0.22), which was apparent in 
the first four hours of treatment. The pH improved, although normal levels were 
only reached after 24 hours on high-flow nasal cannula therapy (7.28 ± 0.02 
versus 7.37 ± 0.01, p = 0.02). The rate of nonresponders was 13.3% (4 subjects), 
of whom one needed and accepted noninvasive mechanical ventilation and three 
required intubation. Intensive care unit mortality was 3.3% (1 subject), and a 
patient died after discharge to the ward (hospital mortality of 6.6%).
CONCLUSION: High-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy is effective for moderate 
hypercapnic respiratory failure as it helps normalize clinical and gas exchange 
levels with an acceptable rate of nonresponders who require ventilatory support.

Publisher: OBJETIVO: Avaliar a eficácia e a segurança da oxigenoterapia com uso 
de cânula nasal de alto fluxo no tratamento da insuficiência respiratória 
hipercápnica moderada em pacientes que não conseguem tolerar ou têm 
contraindicações para ventilação mecânica não invasiva.
MÉTODOS: Estudo prospectivo observacional de 13 meses envolvendo participantes 
admitidos a uma unidade de terapia intensiva com insuficiência respiratória 
hipercápnica ou durante o processo de seu desenvolvimento. Os parâmetros 
clínicos e de troca gasosa foram registrados em intervalos regulares durante as 
primeiras 24 horas. Os parâmetros finais foram saturação de oxigênio entre 88 e 
92%, juntamente da redução do esforço respiratório (frequência respiratória) e 
da normalização do pH (≥ 7,35). Os participantes foram considerados não 
responsivos em caso de necessidade de utilização de suporte ventilatório.
RESULTADOS: Trinta participantes foram tratados utilizando oxigenoterapia com 
cânula nasal de alto fluxo. Esta foi uma população mista com exacerbação de 
doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica, edema pulmonar cardiogênico agudo, e 
insuficiência respiratória aguda pós-operatória e pós-extubação. Observou-se 
melhora não significante na frequência respiratória (28,0 ± 0,9 versus 24,3 ± 
1,5; p = 0,22), que foi aparente nas primeiras 4 horas do tratamento. Ocorreu 
melhora do pH, embora só se tenham obtido níveis normais após 24 horas de 
tratamento com cânula nasal de alto fluxo (7,28 ± 0,02 versus 7,37 ± 0,01; p = 
0,02). A proporção de não responsivos foi de 13,3% (quatro participantes), dos 
quais um necessitou e aceitou ventilação mecânica não invasiva, e três 
necessitaram de intubação. A mortalidade na unidade de terapia intensiva foi de 
3,3% (um participante), e um paciente morreu após a alta para a enfermaria 
(mortalidade hospitalar de 6,6%).
CONCLUSÃO: O oxigenoterapia com cânula nasal de alto fluxo é eficaz para a 
insuficiência respiratória hipercápnica moderada e ajuda a normalizar os 
parâmetros clínicos e de troca gasosa, com taxa aceitável de não responsivos que 
necessitaram de suporte ventilatório.

OBJETIVO: Avaliar a eficácia e a segurança da oxigenoterapia com uso de cânula 
nasal de alto fluxo no tratamento da insuficiência respiratória hipercápnica 
moderada em pacientes que não conseguem tolerar ou têm contraindicações para 
ventilação mecânica não invasiva.
MÉTODOS: Estudo prospectivo observacional de 13 meses envolvendo participantes 
admitidos a uma unidade de terapia intensiva com insuficiência respiratória 
hipercápnica ou durante o processo de seu desenvolvimento. Os parâmetros 
clínicos e de troca gasosa foram registrados em intervalos regulares durante as 
primeiras 24 horas. Os parâmetros finais foram saturação de oxigênio entre 88 e 
92%, juntamente da redução do esforço respiratório (frequência respiratória) e 
da normalização do pH (≥ 7,35). Os participantes foram considerados não 
responsivos em caso de necessidade de utilização de suporte ventilatório.
RESULTADOS: Trinta participantes foram tratados utilizando oxigenoterapia com 
cânula nasal de alto fluxo. Esta foi uma população mista com exacerbação de 
doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica, edema pulmonar cardiogênico agudo, e 
insuficiência respiratória aguda pós-operatória e pós-extubação. Observou-se 
melhora não significante na frequência respiratória (28,0 ± 0,9 versus 24,3 ± 
1,5; p = 0,22), que foi aparente nas primeiras 4 horas do tratamento. Ocorreu 
melhora do pH, embora só se tenham obtido níveis normais após 24 horas de 
tratamento com cânula nasal de alto fluxo (7,28 ± 0,02 versus 7,37 ± 0,01; p = 
0,02). A proporção de não responsivos foi de 13,3% (quatro participantes), dos 
quais um necessitou e aceitou ventilação mecânica não invasiva, e três 
necessitaram de intubação. A mortalidade na unidade de terapia intensiva foi de 
3,3% (um participante), e um paciente morreu após a alta para a enfermaria 
(mortalidade hospitalar de 6,6%).
CONCLUSÃO: O oxigenoterapia com cânula nasal de alto fluxo é eficaz para a 
insuficiência respiratória hipercápnica moderada e ajuda a normalizar os 
parâmetros clínicos e de troca gasosa, com taxa aceitável de não responsivos que 
necessitaram de suporte ventilatório.

DOI: 10.5935/0103-507X.20190026
PMCID: PMC6649229
PMID: 31141082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None.


43. COPD. 2018 Jun;15(3):271-276. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2018.1469608. Epub 2018 May 
25.

Physical Inactivity, Functional Status and Exercise Capacity in COPD Patients 
Receiving Home-Based Oxygen Therapy.

Mazzarin C(1), Kovelis D(1), Biazim S(1), Pitta F(2), Valderramas S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Postgraduate Program in Internal Medicine , Federal University of Paraná , 
Curitiba , PR , Brazil.
(2)b Laboratory of Research in Respiratory Physiotherapy, Department of Physical 
Therapy , State University of Londrina , Londrina , PR , Brazil.
(3)c Department of Prevention and Rehabilitation in Physical Therapy, Program in 
Internal Medicine , Federal University of Paraná , Curitiba , PR , Brazil.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has systemic consequences that lead 
to reduced physical activity in daily life (PADL). Little is known about PADL 
and its associations in individuals with COPD on home-based long-term oxygen 
therapy (LTOT). The objective of the study was to determine whether there is an 
association between severe physical inactivity and pulmonary function, fatigue, 
dyspnea, functional status and exercise capacity in individuals with COPD on 
home-based LTOT using electric oxygen concentrators and to investigate which of 
these variables could influence inactivity in these individuals. The population 
sample included 39 individuals with COPD who were on LTOT (69 ± 8 years, FEV1: 
32 ± 14% predicted). They were assessed in terms of PADL (number of steps/day), 
fatigue (Fatigue Severity Scale - FSS), dyspnea (Medical Research Council - MRC 
scale), functional status (London Chest ADL scale [LCADL] and Timed Up and Go 
[TUG] test) and functional exercise capacity (Six-Minute Step test [6MST] and 
Sit-to-Stand test [STST]). PADL was markedly low (1444 ± 1203 steps/day) and 
associated with daily duration of LTOT (r = -0.50), fatigue (r = -0.36), LCADL 
(r = -0.41), 6MST (r = 0.48), and STST (r = 0.53) (p < .05 for all). Multiple 
linear regression revealed that daily duration of LTOT and STST explained 39% of 
the variability of PADL. Longer daily duration of LTOT, fatigue, worse 
functional status and exercise capacity were all associated with physical 
inactivity in individuals with COPD on LTOT, whereas daily duration of LTOT and 
the STST were determinants of reduced physical activity.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2018.1469608
PMID: 29799297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Dec 12;12:3549-3556. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S150827. eCollection 2017.

Real-life feasibility and effectiveness of home-based pulmonary rehabilitation 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease requiring medical equipment.

Coquart JB(1), Le Rouzic O(2), Racil G(3), Wallaert B(2), Grosbois JM(4).

Author information:
(1)CETAPS, EA 3832, UFR STAPS, University of Rouen, Normandie-Univ, Mont Saint 
Aignan, France.
(2)Department of Respiratory Diseases, University of Lille, CHRU Lille, Lille, 
France.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, El Manar University, Tunis, 
Tunisia.
(4)FormAction Santé, Pérenchies, France.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) is a key treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) but studies are still needed to identify 
the most pertinent criteria to personalize this intervention and improve its 
efficacy.
OBJECTIVE: This real-life retrospective study compared the effects of home-based 
PR on exercise tolerance, anxiety, depression, and health-related quality of 
life (HRQoL) in COPD patients, according to their medical equipment.
METHODS: Exercise tolerance, anxiety, depression, and HRQoL were evaluated in 
109 patients equipped with long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT), 84 patients with 
noninvasive ventilation (NIV), 25 patients with continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP), and 80 patients with no equipment (NE), before, just after, and 
6 and 12 months after PR.
RESULTS: At baseline, the body mass index in the CPAP and NIV groups was higher 
(p<0.05) than in the other two groups, and the forced expiratory volume in 1 
second was lower in the LTOT and NIV groups (p<0.001). All parameters improved 
after PR in the four groups (p<0.05), but for exercise tolerance, only the 
6-minute stepper test showed maintained improvement after 6 and 12 months, 
whereas the 10 times sit-to-stand and timed up-and-go tests were only improved 
just after PR. At every time point, exercise tolerance was lower in the LTOT 
group (p<0.05), with a similar trend in the NIV group.
CONCLUSION: Despite differences in the medical equipment to treat COPD, 
home-based PR showed comparable feasibility, safety, and efficacy in all 
equipment-based groups. Medical equipment should therefore not be a barrier to 
home-based PR.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S150827
PMCID: PMC5732556
PMID: 29263659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure JM Grosbois received financial 
support from Adair, France Oxygène, Homeperf, LVL, Orkyn, Santélys, SOS Oxygène, 
Sysmed, VitalAire, and the ARS Hauts-de-France for home-based PR program. The 
other authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.


45. BMJ Open. 2019 Jan 17;9(1):e023833. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023833.

Automated oxygen administration versus conventional oxygen therapy after major 
abdominal or thoracic surgery: study protocol for an international multicentre 
randomised controlled study.

L'her E(1)(2), Jaber S(3), Verzilli D(3), Jacob C(4), Huiban B(4), Futier E(5), 
Kerforne T(6), Pateau V(2)(7), Bouchard PA(8), Gouillou M(9), Nowak E(9), 
Lellouche F(8).

Author information:
(1)Medical Intensive Care, CHRU de Brest-La Cavale Blanche, Brest, France.
(2)LATIM INSERM UMR 1101, FHU Techsan, Université de Bretagne Occidentale, 
Brest, France.
(3)Intensive Care Unit, Department of Anesthesiology B, DAR B CHU de 
Montpellier, Hôpital Saint Eloi, Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France.
(4)Anesthesiology Department, CHRU de Brest-La Cavale Blanche, Brest, France.
(5)Anesthesiology Department, Hôpital Estaing, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(6)Anesthesiology Department, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers Cedex, France.
(7)R&D, Oxynov Inc., Technopôle Brest Iroise, Plouzané, France.
(8)Research laboratory, Centre de recherche de l'Institut de Cardiologie et de 
Pneumologie de Québec, Québec, France.
(9)Centre d'Investigation Clinique CIC INSERM 1412, CHRU de Brest-La Cavale 
Blanche, Brest, France.

INTRODUCTION: Hypoxemia and hyperoxia may occur after surgery with potential 
related complications. The FreeO2 PostOp trial is a prospective, multicentre, 
randomised controlled trial that evaluates the clinical impact of automated O2 
administration versus conventional O2 therapy after major abdominal or thoracic 
surgeries. The study is powered to demonstrate benefits of automated oxygen 
titration and weaning in term of oxygenation, which is an important surrogate 
for complications after such interventions.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: After extubation, patients are randomly assigned to the 
Standard (manual O2 administration) or FreeO2 group (automated closed-loop O2 
administration). Stratification is performed for the study centre and a medical 
history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Primary outcome is the 
percentage of time spent in the target zone of oxygen saturation, during a 3-day 
time frame. In both groups, patients will benefit from continuous oximetry 
recordings. The target zone of oxygen saturation is SpO2=88%-92% for patients 
with COPD and 92%-96% for patients without COPD. Secondary outcomes are the 
nursing workload assessed by the number of manual O2 flow adjustments, the time 
spent with severe desaturation (SpO2 <85%) and hyperoxia area (SpO2 >98%), the 
time spent in a hyperoxia area (SpO2 >98%), the VO2, the duration of oxygen 
administration during hospitalisation, the frequency of use of mechanical 
ventilation (invasive or non-invasive), the duration of the postrecovery room 
stay, the hospitalisation length of stay and the survival rate.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The FreeO2 PostOp study is conducted in accordance 
with the declaration of Helsinki and was registered on 11 September 2015 
(http://www.clinicaltrials.gov). First patient inclusion was performed on 14 
January 2016. The results of the study will be presented at academic conferences 
and submitted to peer-reviewed journals.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02546830.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023833
PMCID: PMC6340445
PMID: 30782716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: EL’h reports lecture fees 
and travel expenses for lectures given at academic meetings from GE Healthcare, 
Sedana Medical, Smiths Medical, Air Liquide Medical Systems. EL’h and FL are the 
inventors of the FreeO2 device and founded Oxynov Inc. to develop the commercial 
device. The firm Oxynov Inc. provides the automated oxygen therapy equipment to 
all the participating centres but has no other involvement in the study.


46. Rehabil Nurs. 2017 Sep/Oct;42(5):268-273. doi: 10.1002/rnj.233.

Community Physician-Guided Long-Term Domiciliary Oxygen Therapy Combined With 
Conventional Therapy in Stage IV COPD Patients.

Bao H(1), Wang J, Zhou D, Han Z, Zhang Y, Su L, Ye X, Xu C, Fu M, Li Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shanghai Pudong Hospital, Fudan 
University Pudong Medical Center, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: The aim of the study was to explore clinical effect of community 
physician-guided long-term domiciliary oxygen therapy (LTDOT) on patients with 
Stage IV chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DESIGN: A retrospective study.
METHODS: Fifty-four patients with Stage IV COPD were recruited and randomly 
divided into two groups (the LTDOT group and the control group). Patients in 
LTDOT group accepted additional oxygen therapy for more than 15 hours every day 
with continuous low flow (1-2 L/min) for 3 years.
FINDINGS: PaO2 (O2 pressure), FEV1/FVC (forced vital capacity), and FEV1% 
(percentage of forced expiratory volume in 1 second) in the LTDOT group 
increased significantly after treatment. A significant decrease was observed on 
the BODE index in the LTDOT group (p < .05) but not in control group (p > .05). 
Frequencies and costs of hospitalization therapy and emergency medical services 
were markedly decreased after 3 years of LTDOT.
CONCLUSION: Community physician-guided LTDOT can improve prognosis and reduce 
the costs for stage IV COPD patients.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Rehabilitation nurses can be instrumental in helping 
patients with stage IV COPD learn principles of LTDOT.

DOI: 10.1002/rnj.233
PMID: 26354385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Ir Med J. 2019 May 9;112(5):933.

Oxygen Therapy in Ireland: A Nationwide Review of Delivery, Monitoring and Cost 
Implications.

O’Donnell C(1), Davis P(2), McDonnell T(1).

Author information:
(1)St. Vincent’s University Hospital
(2)Community Healthcare Organisation (CHO), Area 6

Aims Our aim was to establish which hospitals in Ireland are running oxygen 
clinics and to compare oxygen prescription in hospitals to a guideline standard. 
Long term oxygen therapy is known to be of benefit to a specific cohort of 
patients but is not without risk. Methods We sent an online questionnaire and 
followed up by phone to representatives in Irish hospitals in which domiciliary 
oxygen is prescribed. We obtained responses from 32 hospitals. Results Twelve 
hospitals (38%) had a dedicated oxygen assessment clinic while twenty (62%) did 
not. Centres without oxygen clinics generally prescribed oxygen following an 
in-patient stay 18/23 centres (78%) and were unable to provide follow up for 
patients on oxygen in 6/23 centres (26%). Centres with oxygen clinics generally 
met criteria for initial assessment and oxygen prescription, however titration 
of oxygen and general follow up did not meet guideline recommendations. 
Conclusion Due to a lack of dedicated oxygen assessment and review services, 
many Irish patients are not optimally treated with domiciliary oxygen.

PMID: 31411015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.


48. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2018 Jan 9;98(2):109-112. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0376-2491.2018.02.007.

[A study on the effects and safety of sequential humidified high flow nasal 
cannula oxygenation therapy on the COPD patients after extubation].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhang JC(1), Wu FX, Meng LL, Zeng CY, Lu YQ.

Author information:
(1)Emergency Center, First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 
321000, China.

Objective: To investigate and compare the effect and safety of nasal high-flow 
oxygen therapy (HFNCO) and noninvasive ventilation (NIV) therapy after 
extubation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Methods: All COPD patients subjected to mechanical ventilation in the Emergency 
Intensive Unit of the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University during 
January 2015 to June 2016 were included in the study. The patients were divided 
into two groups after extubation and HFNCO and NIV were adopted on each group 
respectively. Clinical indexes including the patients' general condition, blood 
gas analysis and pulmonary function before and after extubation, ratio of 
re-intubation and CT grades were collected and analyzed. Results: There was no 
significant difference in the incidence of aspiration (4.8% vs 8.3%), pressure 
sores (0 vs 8.3%) and delirium (4.8% vs 12.5%) between the two groups (all 
P>0.05). At 12 h after extubation, the oxygenation index of NIV group was 
significantly higher than that of the HFNCO group (265±29 vs 297±33; P<0.05), 
while no significant difference in PCO(2) (P>0.05). For 24 h and 72 h after 
extubation, there was no statistically significant difference in oxygenation 
index and PCO(2) between the both groups (P>0.05). The intensive care unit (ICU) 
retention time in HFNCO group was significantly lower than that in NIV group 
(13.7±0.8 vs 15.2±0.5; P<0.05). In addition, no significant difference between 
the two groups in mortality and re-intubation rate at 28 d (P>0.05) was 
observed. Conclusion: HFNCO is effective and safe in the treatment of COPD 
patients after extubation, and it is hence valuable for further clinical 
application.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨慢性阻塞性肺疾病(简称慢阻肺)患者拔管后序贯经鼻高流量氧疗效果及安全性。 方法： 
选择浙江大学医学院附属第一医院急诊监护室(EICU)2015年1月至2016年6月收住的符合条件的45例需机械通气的慢阻肺患者，按随机数字表法所有患者拔除气管插管后分别采用序贯应用经鼻高流量氧疗(高流量组21例)和无创机械通气(无创组24例)进行治疗，并对两组患者的一般情况、精神状态、谵妄状态、拔管前后肺功能及血气分析(氧合指数、PCO(2))、再插管率等临床指标进行对比分析。 
结果： 两组患者在误吸(4.8%比8.3%)、压疮(0比8.3%)、谵妄(4.8%比12.5%)发生率方面差异均无统计学意义(均P>0.05)；拔管后12 
h无创组氧合指数显著高于高流量组(265±29比297±33；P<0.05)，而PCO(2)两组间差异无统计学意义(P>0.05)；拔管后24、72 
h两组氧合指数、PCO(2)差异均无统计学意义(均P>0.05)；高流量组重症监护室停留时间明显低于无创组(13.7±0.8比15.2±0.5；P<0.05)；28 
d病死率、再插管率两组间差异无统计学意义(P>0.05)。 结论： 经鼻高流量氧疗在慢阻肺患者拔管后序贯治疗中疗效确切，安全可靠，可在临床中推广应用。.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0376-2491.2018.02.007
PMID: 29343034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Chest. 2010 Jul;138(1):179-87. doi: 10.1378/chest.09-2555.

Oxygen therapy for patients with COPD: current evidence and the long-term oxygen 
treatment trial.

Stoller JK(1), Panos RJ, Krachman S, Doherty DE, Make B; Long-term Oxygen 
Treatment Trial Research Group.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Institute, Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, 
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Long-term use of supplemental oxygen improves survival in patients with COPD and 
severe resting hypoxemia. However, the role of oxygen in symptomatic patients 
with COPD and more moderate hypoxemia at rest and desaturation with activity is 
unclear. The few long-term reports of supplemental oxygen in this group have 
been of small size and insufficient to demonstrate a survival benefit. 
Short-term trials have suggested beneficial effects other than survival in 
patients with COPD and moderate hypoxemia at rest. In addition, supplemental 
oxygen appeared to improve exercise performance in small short-term 
investigations of patients with COPD and moderate hypoxemia at rest and 
desaturation with exercise, but long-term trials evaluating patient-reported 
outcomes are lacking. This article reviews the evidence for long-term use of 
supplemental oxygen therapy and provides a rationale for the National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute Long-term Oxygen Treatment Trial. The trial plans to 
enroll subjects with COPD with moderate hypoxemia at rest or desaturation with 
exercise and compare tailored oxygen therapy to no oxygen therapy.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.09-2555
PMCID: PMC2897694
PMID: 20605816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Respir Care. 2015 Mar;60(3):382-7. doi: 10.4187/respcare.03470. Epub 2014 Nov 
25.

Oxygenation With a Single Portable Pulse-Dose Oxygen-Conserving Device and 
Combined Stationary and Portable Oxygen Delivery Devices in Subjects With COPD.

Yáñez AM(1), Prat JP(2), Álvarez-Sala JL(3), Calle M(3), Díaz Lobato S(4), 
García Gonzalez JL(4), Rodríguez Gonzalez-Moro JM(5), Galera-Martínez R(6), 
Villasante C(6), Ramos I(2), Franco-Gay M(2), de Lucas P(5).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Palma (IdISPa), Palma de Mallorca, 
Spain. ainam.yanez@ssib.es.
(2)Linde Healthcare (Linde Médica), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Clínico de San Carlos, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, 
Madrid, Spain.
(6)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Instituto de 
Investigación Hospital Universitario La Paz (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Portable oxygen devices simplify and facilitate patient therapy. 
This study was designed to compare S(pO2) and patient satisfaction with a 
portable oxygen concentrator or a combined system consisting of a fixed device 
with continuous-flow oxygen dispensation and a portable device with pulse 
dispensation for ambulation.
METHODS: This crossover trial assessed 25 subjects with COPD (92% men, mean age 
of 72.2 ± 7.4 y, mean FEV1 of 34.14 ± 12.51% of predicted) at 4 hospitals in 
Madrid. All subjects had previously used the combined system, consisting of a 
fixed oxygenation system and a portable system for ambulation, with 16 (64%) 
using stationary and portable concentrators and 9 (36%) using a stationary 
reservoir and portable liquid oxygen bag. Oxygenation settings at rest and while 
walking were determined at baseline. Subjects were maintained on the previous 
combined system for 1 week and then switched to the portable oxygen concentrator 
for 1 week. Mean S(pO2) over 24 h was calculated using the software in the 
oximeter, and compliance was monitored (Visionox).
RESULTS: Low S(pO2) (< 90%) was significantly more frequent during use of the 
portable concentrator alone than with the combined system (37.1% vs 18.4%, P < 
.05). The portable system alone was preferred by 43% of subjects, and the 
combined system was preferred by 36%, whereas 21% were not sure.
CONCLUSIONS: Subjects preferred using a single portable oxygenation system both 
at home and during ambulation. Portable systems alone, however, did not supply 
the same levels of oxygenation as the combination of fixed and portable systems. 
Before the widespread adoption of portable systems as a single device, 
additional studies are needed to determine best-practice protocols for 
adjustment of daytime and nighttime oxygenation settings. (ClinicalTrials.gov 
registration NCT02079753).

Copyright © 2015 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.03470
PMID: 25425710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Br J Nurs. 2019 Jul 25;28(14):912-917. doi: 10.12968/bjon.2019.28.14.912.

Home oxygen therapy in patients with COPD: safety issues for nurse prescribers.

Moore D(1).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Nurse Specialist and Independent Nurse Prescriber, Mater Hospital 
Belfast.

Two landmark studies demonstrated survival benefit in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) complicated by chronic hypoxaemia with the prescription 
of long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT). Best practice evidence therefore recommends 
that individuals with stable COPD and resting hypoxaemia (PaO2≤7.3 kPa) should 
be assessed for long-term oxygen therapy. However, it is estimated that up to 
one-quarter of COPD patients prescribed LTOT continue to smoke. Oxygen therapy 
consequently presents an obvious fire hazard in the case of such patients, who 
are therefore at greater risk of death or sustaining devastating head and neck 
burns. This article critically analyses, through the context of a care study, 
the professional, ethical and legal issues involved in making a safe prescribing 
decision for LTOT in an individual with COPD who is a current smoker. Home 
oxygen prescription is a growing trend in the COPD population, and it is 
important for nurse prescribers to be aware of the issues highlighted in the 
article to ensure safe prescribing practices.

DOI: 10.12968/bjon.2019.28.14.912
PMID: 31348713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Chest. 2017 Jan;151(1):41-46. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.06.023. Epub 2016 Jul 4.

Use of Palliative Care in Patients With End-Stage COPD and Receiving Home 
Oxygen: National Trends and Barriers to Care in the United States.

Rush B(1), Hertz P(2), Bond A(3), McDermid RC(4), Celi LA(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vancouver General 
Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Harvard T. H. 
Chan School of Public Health, Harvard University, Boston, MA. Electronic 
address: bar890@mail.harvard.edu.
(2)Division of General Internal Medicine, University Health Network, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(3)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vancouver General 
Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of 
Critical Care Medicine, Surrey Memorial Hospital, Surrey, BC, Canada.
(5)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA.

Comment in
    Chest. 2017 Jan;151(1):9-10.
    Chest. 2017 May;151(5):1183-1184.
    Chest. 2017 May;151(5):1184.

BACKGROUND: To investigate the use of palliative care (PC) in patients with 
end-stage COPD receiving home oxygen hospitalized for an exacerbation.
METHODS: A retrospective nationwide cohort analysis was performed, using the 
Nationwide Inpatient Sample. All patients ≥ 18 years of age with a diagnosis of 
COPD, receiving home oxygen, and admitted for an exacerbation were included.
RESULTS: A total of 55,208,382 hospitalizations from the 2006-2012 Nationwide 
Inpatient Sample were examined. There were 181,689 patients with COPD, receiving 
home oxygen, and admitted for an exacerbation; 3,145 patients (1.7%) also had a 
PC contact. There was a 4.5-fold relative increase in PC referral from 2006 
(0.45%) to 2012 (2.56%) (P < .01). Patients receiving PC consultations compared 
with those who did not were older (75.0 years [SD 10.9] vs 70.6 years [SD 9.7]; 
P < .01), had longer hospitalizations (4.9 days [interquartile range, 2.6-8.2] 
vs 3.5 days [interquartile range, 2.1-5.6]), and more likely to die in hospital 
(32.1% vs 1.5%; P < .01). Race was significantly associated with referral to 
palliative care, with white patients referred more often than minorities (P < 
.01). Factors associated with PC referral included age (OR, 1.03; 95% CI, 
1.02-1.04; P < .01), metastatic cancer (OR, 2.40; 95% CI, 2.02-2.87; P < .01), 
nonmetastatic cancer (OR, 2.75; 95% CI, 2.43-3.11; P < .01), invasive mechanical 
ventilation (OR, 4.89; 95% CI, 4.31-5.55; P < .01), noninvasive mechanical 
ventilation (OR, 2.84; 95% CI, 2.58-3.12; P < .01), and Do Not Resuscitate 
status (OR, 7.95; 95% CI, 7.29-8.67; P < .01).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of PC increased dramatically during the study period; 
however, PC contact occurs only in a minority of patients with end-stage COPD 
admitted with an exacerbation.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.06.023
PMCID: PMC6026227
PMID: 27387892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Nov 7;12:3281-3287. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S148509. eCollection 2017.

Lung transplantation and survival outcomes in patients with oxygen-dependent 
COPD with regard to their alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency status.

Ekström M(1), Tanash H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Skåne University 
Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Individuals with severe alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) have 
an increased risk of developing COPD. However, outcomes during long-term oxygen 
therapy (LTOT) in patients with severe AATD and hypoxemia are unknown.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a prospective, population-based, consecutive 
cohort study of patients on LTOT due to COPD in the period from January 1, 1987, 
to June 30, 2015, in the Swedish National Registry for Respiratory Failure 
(Swedevox). Severe AATD was identified using the Swedish AATD registry and 
confirmed by isoelectric focusing. Data on lung transplantation (LTx) were 
obtained from the two lung transplantation centers in Sweden. Mortality and 
causes of death were assessed based on the National Causes of Death Registry and 
analyzed using multivariable Cox regression.
RESULTS: A total of 14,644 patients who started LTOT due to COPD were included 
in this study. No patient was lost to follow up. Patients with AATD were 
younger, included more males and more never smokers, and had fewer 
comorbidities. During a median follow-up of 1.6 years (interquartile range 
[IQR], 2.7) on LTOT, patients without severe AATD had a higher mortality, hazard 
ratio [HR] 1.53 (95% CI, 1.24-1.88), adjusting for age, sex, smoking status, 
body mass index, performance status, level of hypoxemia, and comorbidities. 
Cardiovascular deaths were increased. A higher proportion of AATD patients 
underwent LTx, 53 (19%) vs 118 (1%). Survival after LTx was similar for AATD and 
non-AATD patients and was predicted by age.
CONCLUSION: In oxygen-dependent COPD, patients with severe AATD have a longer 
survival time on LTOT, but they have a similar prognosis after lung 
transplantation compared with patients without AATD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S148509
PMCID: PMC5683783
PMID: 29158672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


54. Respir Med. 2011 Aug;105(8):1211-21. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.02.015. Epub 2011 
Mar 10.

Clinical and radiographic correlates of hypoxemia and oxygen therapy in the 
COPDGene study.

Kim DK(1), Jacobson FL, Washko GR, Casaburi R, Make BJ, Crapo JD, Silverman EK, 
Hersh CP.

Author information:
(1)Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Severe hypoxemia is a major complication of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Long-term oxygen therapy is beneficial in hypoxemic 
COPD patients. However, the clinical and radiographic predictors of hypoxemia 
and the use of oxygen therapy are not well described. This study aimed to find 
the correlates of resting hypoxemia and the pattern of oxygen use in moderate to 
severe COPD patients.
METHODS: Subjects with GOLD stage II or higher COPD from the first 2500 COPDGene 
subjects were included in this analysis. All subjects were current or ex-smokers 
between ages 45 and 80. Severe resting hypoxemia was defined as room air oxygen 
saturation (SpO(2)) ≤88%. Use of supplemental oxygen therapy was determined by 
questionnaire.
RESULTS: Eighty-two of 1060 COPD subjects (7.7%) had severe resting hypoxemia. 
Twenty-one of the 82 (25.6%) were not using continuous supplemental oxygen. 
Female sex, higher BMI, lower FEV(1), and enrollment in Denver were independent 
risk factors for hypoxemia; emphysema severity on quantitative chest CT scan did 
not predict hypoxemia. 132 of 971(13.6%) subjects without severe resting 
hypoxemia were using continuous supplemental oxygen. In non-hypoxemic oxygen 
users, Denver recruitment, higher BMI, lower FEV(1), and more severe dyspnea 
were associated with the use of continuous oxygen.
CONCLUSIONS: A large number of COPD patients without severe hypoxemia were using 
supplemental oxygen therapy and the pattern of oxygen use was affected by 
factors other than resting SpO(2) and emphysema severity. Longitudinal data will 
be required to reveal the effects of oxygen therapy in this subgroup.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: http://clinicaltrials.gov (NCT00608764).

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.02.015
PMCID: PMC3116986
PMID: 21396809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2018 Dec 24;115(51-52):871-877. doi: 
10.3238/arztebl.2018.0871.

Long-Term Oxygen Therapy.

Koczulla AR(1), Schneeberger T, Jarosch I, Kenn K, Gloeckl R.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Pulmonary Rehabilitation Research, Schoen Klinik 
Berchtesgadener Land, Schoenau am Koenigssee; Philipps University Marburg 
(Schoenau site), German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg; Department for 
Prevention, Rehabilitation, and Sports Medicine, Technical University Munich 
(TUM), Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2019 Apr 19;116(16):287.

BACKGROUND: Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) is an established treatment for 
patients with chronic hypoxemia. Its scientific basis is derived mainly from two 
trials from the early 1980s that showed a survival advantage for patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) treated with LTOT. Robust data are 
not available for other diseases associated with hypoxemia.
METHODS: This review is based on pertinent publications retrieved by a selective 
search in PubMed.
RESULTS: The use of LTOT for 15 to 16 hours per day (or, better, 24 hours per 
day) is recommended in current guidelines for patients with chronic hypoxemia 
(PaO2 ≤ 55 mm Hg) because this treatment was found to be associated with a lower 
mortality rate compared to no LTOT (33% vs. 55%, p <0.05) based on data from the 
early 1980s. In the short term, oxygen administration to a hypoxemic patient can 
improve oxygen saturation by nine percentage points and improve physical 
performance to a clinically relevant extent (6-minute walking test: + 37 m, p 
<0.001). The available data do not support the use of LTOT for normoxemic 
patients. LTOT should only be administered for strict indications, in accordance 
with the guidelines, and only in a form suitable for the individual patient. 
Skin burns can occur as a side effect of LTOT because of contact explosions with 
any type of fire.
CONCLUSION: The acquisition of further robust data would be desirable, 
particularly with respect to patient-relevant outcome parameters including 
quality of life, performance status, and mortality. Moreover, the German 
guidelines on oxygen therapy need to be updated.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2018.0871
PMCID: PMC6381774
PMID: 30765024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Aug;36(4):552-66. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1556058. 
Epub 2015 Aug 3.

Supplemental Oxygen Therapy for Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease.

Barjaktarevic I(1), Cooper CB(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California.

Oxygen is necessary for aerobic metabolism. Since the human body cannot produce 
or store oxygen, a continuous and adequate delivery of oxygen needs to be 
secured by oxygen uptake from inhaled air via the respiratory system and oxygen 
delivery to body tissues via the circulation. Severely reduced lung function in 
advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) may be a limiting factor 
for adequate oxygen uptake and patients with this disease may require 
supplemental oxygen therapy. While the methodology of oxygen delivery in home 
settings represents a continuously evolving field, oxygen therapy itself has 
been an integral part of the management of severely hypoxemic patients with COPD 
for more than 50 years despite the lack of full understanding of its effects and 
the relative paucity of clinical evidence supporting its use. In this article, 
we review the physiological effects and discuss the clinical benefits of oxygen 
therapy. We also evaluate the evidence supporting and arguing against its use in 
the published literature, discuss its risks and benefits, define criteria for 
prescribing oxygen therapy, and review methods of oxygen delivery in home 
settings.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0035-1556058
PMID: 26238641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Respir Care. 2015 Apr;60(4):540-8. doi: 10.4187/respcare.03647. Epub 2014 Dec 
16.

Effects of Oxygen Supply During Training on Subjects With COPD Who Are 
Normoxemic at Rest and During Exercise: A Blinded Randomized Controlled Trial.

Spielmanns M(1), Fuchs-Bergsma C(2), Winkler A(2), Fox G(2), Krüger S(3), Baum 
K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, St Remigius Hospital, Leverkusen, Germany. 
Faculty of Health, School of Medicine, Witten/Herdecke University, 
Witten/Herdecke, Germany. spielmanns@k-plus.de.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, St Remigius Hospital, Leverkusen, Germany.
(3)Department of Pneumology, Allergology, Sleep and Respiratory Medicine, 
Kaiserswerther Diakonie, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Trainingsinstitut Prof Dr Baum, Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND: It is well established that physical training enhances functionality 
and quality of life in patients with COPD. However, little data exist concerning 
the effects of the usefulness of oxygen supply during exercise training for > 3 
months in patients with COPD who are normoxemic at rest and during exercise. We 
hypothesized that oxygen supply during training sessions enables higher training 
intensity and thus optimizes training results in patients with COPD.
METHODS: In this blinded randomized controlled study, we carried out a 24-week 
training program with progressively increasing loads involving large muscle 
groups. In addition, we compared the influences of oxygen supplementation. 
Thirty-six subjects with moderate-to-severe COPD who were not dependent on 
long-term oxygen therapy trained under supervision for 24 weeks (3 times/week at 
30 min/session). Subjects were randomized into 2 groups: oxygen supply via nasal 
cannula at a flow of 4 L/min and compressed air at the same flow throughout the 
training program. Lung function tests at rest (inspiratory vital capacity, FEV1, 
Tiffeneau index), cycle spiroergometry (peak ventilation, peak oxygen uptake, 
peak respiratory exchange rate, submaximal and peak lactic acid concentrations), 
6-min walk tests, and quality-of-life assessments (Medical Outcomes Study 
36-Item Short Form questionnaire) were conducted before and after 12 and 24 
weeks.
RESULTS: Independent of oxygen supplementation, statistically significant 
improvements occurred in quality of life, maximal tolerated load during cycling, 
peak oxygen uptake, and 6-min walk test after 12 weeks of training. Notably, 
there were no further improvements from 12 to 24 weeks despite progressively 
increased training loads.
CONCLUSIONS: Endurance training 3 times/week resulted in significant 
improvements in quality of life and exercise capacity in subjects with 
moderate-to-severe COPD within the initial 12 weeks, followed by a stable period 
over the following 12 weeks with no further benefits of supplemental oxygen.

Copyright © 2015 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.03647
PMID: 25516993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BMC Emerg Med. 2018 Jun 26;18(1):17. doi: 10.1186/s12873-018-0169-2.

Titration of oxygen therapy in critically ill emergency department patients: a 
feasibility study.

Dobbe ASM(1), Stolmeijer R(2), Ter Maaten JC(3), Ligtenberg JJM(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)BSc of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Emergency physician, Emergency Department, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Internist acute medicine, Emergency physician, Emergency Department, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Emergency Department, Internal Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen 
(UMCG), Hanzeplein 1, 9700, RB, Groningen, The Netherlands. 
j.j.m.ligtenberg@umcg.nl.
(5)Internist acute medicine, Emergency physician, Emergency Department, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. 
j.j.m.ligtenberg@umcg.nl.

BACKGROUND: Liberal use of oxygen in an emergency situation is common. Today, 
most health care professionals do not adjust the amount of oxygen given when a 
saturation of 100% or a PaO2 which exceeds the normal range is reached- which 
may result in hyperoxia. There is increasing evidence for the toxic effects of 
hyperoxia. Therefore, it seems justified to aim for normoxia when giving oxygen. 
This study evaluates whether it is feasible to aim for normoxia when giving 
oxygen therapy to patients at the emergency department (ED).
METHODS: A prospective cohort study was performed at the ED of the University 
Medical Center Groningen (UMCG). A protocol was developed, aiming for normoxia. 
During a 14 week period all patients > 18 years arriving at the ED between 
8 a.m. and 23 p.m. requiring oxygen therapy registered for cardiology, internal 
medicine, emergency medicine and pulmonology were included. Statistical analysis 
was performed using student independent t-test, Mann-Whitney U-test, Fisher's 
exact test or a Pearson's chi-squared test.
RESULTS: During the study period the study protocol was followed and normoxia 
was obtained after 1 h at the ED in 86,4% of the patients. Patients with COPD 
were more at risk for not being titrated to normal oxygen levels.
CONCLUSIONS: We showed that it is feasible to titrate oxygen therapy to normoxia 
at the ED. The study results will be used for further research assessing the 
potential beneficial effects of normoxia compared to hyper- or hypoxia in ED 
patients and for the development of guidelines.

DOI: 10.1186/s12873-018-0169-2
PMCID: PMC6019296
PMID: 29940886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study was reported to the medical ethics review committee (METc-UMCG) at the 
University Medical Center Groningen. Since regular patient care would be 
performed, the METc approved the study and waived provision of informed consent 
to the patient. Reference number: 201500904. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


59. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 18;10(3):e0120684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120684. 
eCollection 2015.

Oxygen therapy use in older adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nishi SP(1), Zhang W(1), Kuo YF(2), Sharma G(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Galveston, Texas, 
United States of America.
(2)Sealy Center on Aging, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Galveston, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Galveston, Texas, 
United States of America; Sealy Center on Aging, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

RATIONALE: Oxygen therapy improves survival and function in severely hypoxemic 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients based on two landmark 
studies conducted over 40 years ago. We hypothesize that oxygen users in the 
current era may be very different. We examined trends and subject 
characteristics associated with oxygen therapy use from 2001-2010 in the United 
States.
METHODS: We examined Medicare beneficiaries with COPD who received oxygen from 
2001 to 2010. COPD subjects were identified by: 1) ≥2 outpatient visits >30 days 
apart within one year with an encounter diagnosis of COPD; or 2) an acute care 
hospitalization with COPD as the primary or secondary discharge diagnosis. 
Oxygen therapy and sustained oxygen therapy were defined as ≥1 and ≥11 claims 
for oxygen, respectively, in the durable medical equipment file in a calendar 
year. Primary outcome measures were factors associated with oxygen therapy and 
sustained oxygen therapy over the study period.
RESULTS: Oxygen therapy increased from 33.7% in 2001 to 40.5% in 2010 (p-value 
of trend <0.001). Sustained oxygen therapy use increased from 19.5% in 2001, 
peaked in 2008 to 26.9% and declined to 18.5% in 2010. The majority of subjects 
receiving oxygen therapy and sustained oxygen therapy were female. Besides 
gender, factors associated with any oxygen use or sustained oxygen therapy were 
non-Hispanic white race, low socioeconomic status and ≥2 comorbidities.
CONCLUSIONS: Any oxygen use among fee-for service Medicare beneficiaries with 
COPD is high. Current users of oxygen are older females with multiple 
comorbidities. Decline in sustained oxygen therapy use after 2008 may be related 
to reimbursement policy change.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120684
PMCID: PMC4364693
PMID: 25785586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


60. Respir Med. 2014 Mar;108(3):511-6. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.10.025. Epub 2013 
Nov 14.

Trends in long-term oxygen therapy for COPD in Denmark from 2001 to 2010.

Ringbaek TJ(1), Lange P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital of Copenhagen, 
Hvidovre, Denmark. Electronic address: ringbaek@dadlnet.dk.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital of Copenhagen, 
Hvidovre, Denmark; Section of Social Medicine, Department of Public Health, 
University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate changes in demographics, incidence, prevalence, 
treatment modalities, and survival of COPD patients on long-term oxygen therapy 
(LTOT) from year 2001-2010 in Denmark.
METHODS: All 14,965 COPD patients with COPD treated LTOT in Denmark in the 
period 2001-2010.
RESULTS: During the study period, the incidence and prevalence of COPD patients 
on LTOT increased from 30.5 to 32.2 per 100.000, and from 42.0 to 48.1 per 
100.000, respectively. Mean age of patients increased from 73.4 to 74.8 years, P 
< 0.001. An increasing number of patients were prescribed LTOT in connection 
with discharge after hospitalisation for an exacerbation (2001 vs. 2010: 76.5% 
vs. 91.7%, P < 0.001); were prescribed oxygen 15-24 h/day (85.8% vs. 89.5%, P < 
0.001); had mobile oxygen (56.4% vs. 94.2%, P < 0.001), and stopped LTOT alive 
within 6 months (20.6% vs. 30.8%, P < 0.001). Ninety-nine percent of the 
patients received oxygen concentrator or liquid oxygen with no change in the 
study period (P = 0.66). The median survival on LTOT increased insignificantly 
from 16.5 to 17.8 months (P = 0.12). Women had a lower risk of dying compared 
with men, with an adjusted hazard ratio of 0.81 (95% confidence interval (CI) 
0.78-0.84), P < 0.001). During the study period, the risk of death for women, 
compared to men, decreased significantly with a hazard ratio of 0.978 (95% CI: 
0.964-0.992) per calendar year.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of COPD patients on LTOT in Denmark has levelled of 
during recent years, and the quality of prescribing LTOT and follow up has 
improved. Women had better survival than men, and this difference has increased 
during the study period.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.10.025
PMID: 24275146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2017 May;23(3):261-268. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000373.

Interventional pulmonology in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Gompelmann D(1), Sarmand N, Herth FJ.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Pneumology and Critical Care Medicine, Thoraxklinik at 
University of Heidelberg bCenter for Lung Research, Heidelberg, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and emphysema 
are widespread diseases associated with progressive dyspnea because of airflow 
limitation and hyperinflation. Fundamental therapeutic strategies consist of 
pulmonary rehabilitation, pharmacotherapy, long-term oxygen therapy, noninvasive 
ventilation, and surgical therapeutic approaches.
RECENT FINDINGS: In the last 14 years, endoscopic therapeutic modalities emerged 
as a substantial part of severe COPD and emphysema treatment. Techniques of the 
endoscopic lung volume reduction (ELVR) aim at reduction of hyperinflation. 
Thereby, the reversible valve implantation of which the efficacy was confirmed 
in various randomized controlled trials (RCT) results in lobar volume reduction 
and clinical benefit in emphysema patients with absent interlobar collateral 
ventilation. Nonblocking ELVR methods that are independent of collateral 
ventilation include the partially irreversible coil implantation leading to 
parenchymal compression, the irreversible bronchoscopic thermal vapor ablation 
and polymeric lung volume reduction both inducing inflammatory reaction. The 
nonblocking methods have been examined in only a few RCTs. The targeted lung 
denervation as a novel bronchoscopic therapy for COPD patients aims at 
sustainable bronchodilation by ablation of parasympathetic pulmonary nerves.
SUMMARY: The review summarizes the various endoscopic treatment approaches for 
managment of COPD and emphysema, their mechanism of action, their complications 
and the current available results of the most important RCTs.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000373
PMID: 28221172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Chest. 2011 Jul;140(1):84-90. doi: 10.1378/chest.10-0965. Epub 2010 Nov 11.

COPD and air travel: oxygen equipment and preflight titration of supplemental 
oxygen.

Akerø A(1), Edvardsen A(2), Christensen CC(3), Owe JO(4), Ryg M(2), Skjønsberg 
OH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo. Electronic 
address: aina.akero@medisin.uio.no.
(2)Department of Respiratory Physiology, Glittreklinikken, Hakadal, Norway.
(3)The Institute of Aviation Medicine, Oslo; Department of Respiratory 
Physiology, Glittreklinikken, Hakadal, Norway.
(4)The Institute of Aviation Medicine, Oslo.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo.

BACKGROUND: Patients with COPD may need supplemental oxygen during air travel to 
avoid development of severe hypoxemia. The current study evaluated whether the 
hypoxia-altitude simulation test (HAST), in which patients breathe 15.1% oxygen 
simulating aircraft conditions, can be used to establish the optimal dose of 
supplemental oxygen. Also, the various types of oxygen-delivery equipment 
allowed for air travel were compared.
METHODS: In a randomized crossover trial, 16 patients with COPD were exposed to 
alveolar hypoxia: in a hypobaric chamber (HC) at 2,438 m (8,000 ft) and with a 
HAST. During both tests, supplemental oxygen was given by nasal cannula (NC) 
with (1) continuous flow, (2) an oxygen-conserving device, and (3) a portable 
oxygen concentrator (POC).
RESULTS: PaO(2) kPa (mm Hg) while in the HC and during the HAST with 
supplemental oxygen at 2 L/min (pulse setting 2) on devices 1 to 3 was (1) 8.6 ± 
1.0 (65 ± 8) vs 12.5 ± 2.4 (94 ± 18) (P < .001), (2) 8.6 ± 1.6 (64 ± 12) vs 9.7 
± 1.5 (73 ± 11) (P < .001), and (3) 7.7 ± 0.9 (58 ± 7) vs 8.2 ± 1.1 (62 ± 8) (P= 
.003), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The HAST may be used to identify patients needing supplemental 
oxygen during air travel. However, oxygen titration using an NC during a HAST 
causes accumulation of oxygen within the facemask and underestimates the oxygen 
dose required. When comparing the various types of oxygen-delivery equipment in 
an HC at 2,438 m (8,000 ft), compressed gaseous oxygen with continuous flow or 
with an oxygen-conserving device resulted in the same PaO(2), whereas a POC 
showed significantly lower PaO(2) values.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: Identifier: NCT01019538; URL: 
clinicaltrials.gov.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.10-0965
PMID: 21071527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Jan 9;13:231-235. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S148673. eCollection 2018.

Which patients with moderate hypoxemia benefit from long-term oxygen therapy? 
Ways forward.

Ekström M(1), Ringbaek T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Skåne University 
Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Respiratory Department, Hvidovre Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) improves prognosis in patients with COPD and 
chronic severe hypoxemia. The efficacy in moderate hypoxemia (tension of 
arterial oxygen; on air, 7.4-8.0 kPa) was questioned by a recent large trial. We 
reviewed the evidence to date (five randomized trials; 1,191 participants, all 
with COPD). Based on the current evidence, the survival time may be improved in 
patients with moderate hypoxemia with secondary polycythemia or right-sided 
heart failure, but not in the absence of these signs. Clinically, LTOT is not 
indicated in moderate hypoxemia except in the few patients with polycythemia or 
signs of right-sided heart failure, which may reflect more chronic and severe 
hypoxemia.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S148673
PMCID: PMC5765977
PMID: 29386891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


64. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2017 Jul;146:101-108. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2017.05.013. Epub 2017 May 30.

Physiological closed-loop control in intelligent oxygen therapy: A review.

Sanchez-Morillo D(1), Olaby O(2), Fernandez-Granero MA(3), Leon-Jimenez A(4).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Engineering and Telemedicine Research Group, Department of 
Automation, Electronics and Computer Architecture and Networks, School of 
Engineering, University of Cadiz, Avda. de la Universidad, 10, 11519 Puerto 
Real, Cadiz, Spain. Electronic address: daniel.morillo@uca.es.
(2)Biomedical Engineering and Telemedicine Research Group, Department of 
Automation, Electronics and Computer Architecture and Networks, School of 
Engineering, University of Cadiz, Avda. de la Universidad, 10, 11519 Puerto 
Real, Cadiz, Spain; Department of Control Engineering and Automation, University 
of Aleppo, Aleppo, Syria.
(3)Biomedical Engineering and Telemedicine Research Group, Department of 
Automation, Electronics and Computer Architecture and Networks, School of 
Engineering, University of Cadiz, Avda. de la Universidad, 10, 11519 Puerto 
Real, Cadiz, Spain.
(4)Pulmonology, Allergy and Thoracic Surgery Unit, Puerta del Mar University 
Hospital, Cádiz, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Oxygen therapy has become a standard care for the 
treatment of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and other 
hypoxemic chronic lung diseases. In current systems, manually continuous 
adjustment of O2 flow rate is a time-consuming task, often unsuccessful, that 
requires experienced staff. The primary aim of this systematic review is to 
collate and report on the principles, algorithms and accuracy of autonomous 
physiological close-loop controlled oxygen devices as well to present 
recommendations for future research and studies in this area.
METHODS: A literature search was performed on medical database MEDLINE, 
engineering database IEEE-Xplore and wide-raging scientific databases Scopus and 
Web of Science. A narrative synthesis of the results was carried out.
RESULTS: A summary of the findings of this review suggests that when compared to 
the conventional manual practice, the closed-loop controllers maintain higher 
saturation levels, spend less time below the target saturation, and save oxygen 
resources. Nonetheless, despite of their potential, autonomous oxygen therapy 
devices are scarce in real clinical applications.
CONCLUSIONS: Robustness of control algorithms, fail-safe mechanisms, limited 
reliability of sensors, usability issues and the need for standardized 
evaluating methods of assessing risks can be among the reasons for this lack of 
matureness and need to be addressed before the wide spreading of a new 
generation of automatic oxygen devices.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2017.05.013
PMID: 28688479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Can Respir J. 2015 Nov-Dec;22(6):324-30. doi: 10.1155/2015/280604. Epub 2015 Aug 
25.

Eligibility for home oxygen programs and funding across Canada.

Lacasse Y, Bernard S, Maltais F.

BACKGROUND: In Canada, although medical insurance is generally universal, 
significant differences exist in the provision of home oxygen therapy across the 
country.
OBJECTIVE: To systematically compare the terms of reference for home oxygen 
across Canada, with a focus on the clinical inclusion criteria to the programs.
METHODS: The authors searched the terms of reference of the 10&nbsp;Canadian 
provinces and three territories, focusing on general eligibility criteria for 
home oxygen (including blood gas criteria, and eligibility criteria for 
ambulatory and nocturnal oxygen), and compared the eligibility criteria to the 
widely accepted criteria of the Nocturnal Oxygen Therapy Trial (NOTT) trial, the 
clinical recommendations of the Canadian Thoracic Society and the results of 
Cochrane reviews.
RESULTS: The terms of reference for nine provinces were retrieved. All 
jurisdictions have similar criteria for long-term oxygen therapy, with slight 
differences in the thresholds of prescription and the clinical criteria defining 
'pulmonary hypertension' or 'cor pulmonale'. The use of oxyhemoglobin saturation 
as a criterion for funding is inconsistent. All nine provinces fund nocturnal 
oxygen, all with different clinical criteria. Funding for portable oxygen widely 
varies across provinces, whether the ambulatory equipment is offered to patients 
on long-term oxygen therapy or to those who have isolated exercise-induced 
desaturation. The terms of reimbursement are very heterogeneous.
CONCLUSIONS: Heterogeneity exists in the criteria for eligibility to home oxygen 
programs and funding across Canada. Terms of prescription and reimbursement of 
oxygen are not necessarily supported by available evidence from the current 
literature in several Canadian jurisdictions.

HISTORIQUE : Même si l’assurance-maladie est généralement universelle au Canada, 
on constate d’importantes différences dans la prestation de l’oxygénothérapie à 
domicile en fonction des régions.
OBJECTIF : Comparer systématiquement les modalités liées à l’oxygénothérapie à 
domicile dans les diverses régions du Canada, en s’attardant sur les critères 
d’inclusion clinique.
MÉTHODOLOGIE : Les auteurs ont cherché les modalités des dix provinces et des 
trois territoires du Canada et se sont attardés aux critères généraux 
d’admissibilité à l’oxygénothérapie à domicile (y compris les critères de gaz 
sanguins et les critères d’admissibilité à l’oxygénothérapie ambulatoire et 
nocturne). Ils ont comparé les critères d’admissibilité aux critères largement 
acceptés de l’essai sur l’oxygénothérapie nocturne (NOTT), les recommandations 
cliniques de la Société canadienne de thoracologie et les résultats des analyses 
Cochrane.
RÉSULTATS : Les chercheurs ont extrait les modalités de neuf provinces. Toutes 
possèdent des critères similaires pour l’oxygénothérapie à long terme, malgré de 
légères différences quant aux seuils d’ordonnance et aux critères cliniques pour 
définir « l’hypertension pulmonaire » ou le « cœur pulmonaire ». La saturation 
en oxyhémoglobine n’est pas toujours un critère de financement. Les neuf 
provinces financent l’oxygénothérapie nocturne, toutes selon des critères 
cliniques différents. Le financement des réservoirs d’oxygène portatifs varie 
considérablement selon les provinces, qu’il soit offert aux patients sous 
oxygénothérapie à long terme ou à ceux qui souffrent de désaturation isolée 
causée par l’exercice. Les modalités de remboursement sont très hétérogènes.
CONCLUSIONS : Les critères d’admissibilité à l’oxygénothérapie à domicile et à 
son financement sont hétérogènes au Canada. D’après les données tirées des 
publications à jour de plusieurs régions sociosanitaires du Canada, les 
modalités de prescription et le remboursement de l’oxygène ne sont pas toujours 
offerts.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/280604
PMCID: PMC4676395
PMID: 26306331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care. 2017 Sep;11(3):159-164. doi: 
10.1097/SPC.0000000000000282.

Palliative oxygen for chronic breathlessness: what new evidence?

Ahmadi Z(1), Currow DC, Ekström M.

Author information:
(1)aDivision of Respiratory Medicine & Allergology, Department of Clinical 
Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden bImPACCT, Faculty of Health, University 
of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, New South Wales, Australia.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Supplemental oxygen improves survival in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe hypoxaemia, but the 
effect of oxygen therapy in mild or moderate hypoxaemia to reduce symptomatic 
chronic breathlessness remains unclear. This review provides an overview of 
recent evidence about the role of oxygen therapy for the relief of chronic 
breathlessness in advanced illness.
RECENT FINDINGS: In COPD, a recent Cochrane review strengthens earlier findings 
regarding the positive effect of supplemental oxygen compared with air during 
exercise test in the training setting. The novel analysis of effect of oxygen 
therapy on quality of life (QoL) showed no clear effect. Short-burst oxygen 
therapy given before exercise had no effect and should not be used.
SUMMARY: Supplemental oxygen during exercise has been shown to reduce 
breathlessness in patients with COPD who have no or mild hypoxaemia, but it is 
not clear whether the reduction in breathlessness shown in the laboratory 
setting translates into a clinically important benefit. Further studies are 
needed to establish this.

DOI: 10.1097/SPC.0000000000000282
PMID: 28644301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Intern Med J. 2015 May;45(5):510-6. doi: 10.1111/imj.12727.

Assessing the use of initial oxygen therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease patients: a retrospective audit of pre-hospital and hospital emergency 
management.

Susanto C(1), Thomas PS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(2)Inflammation and Infection Research Centre (IIRC), Faculty of Medicine, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Carbon dioxide retention in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) exacerbations can be a complication of oxygen therapy. Current 
recommendations suggest an inspired oxygen level (FiO2 ) < 0.28, aiming for 
saturation (SpO2 ) of 88-92% until arterial blood gas analysis is available.
AIMS: This study aims to assess the use of O2 therapy and FiO2 in the emergency 
management of patients with a known diagnosis of COPD.
METHODS: Retrospective audit of 150 COPD patients admitted over 18 months, data 
being extracted from the hospital records.
RESULTS: Of the records reviewed, 57% were male, mean age 75 years. COPD was 
recognised in 53%. SpO2 recorded in 124 patients, with SpO2 < 88% seen in 40 
patients. Oxygen was administered in 123 patients in ambulances; high flow in 
111 patients, and only 12 patients received O2 therapy in line with the 
recommended FiO2 < 0.28. In the emergency department (ED), 112 patients received 
O2 supplementation; high flow given in 68 patients. Hypercapnia was seen in 71 
patients; FiO2 > 0.28 given in 54 patients in ambulances and in 35 patients in 
ED. Non-invasive ventilation was required in 53 patients; FiO2 > 0.28 given in 
29 patients in the ED. Seven patients were admitted to intensive care unit, and 
10 patients died.
CONCLUSION: High-flow oxygen is used for the initial treatment of COPD 
exacerbations, but only 53% are recognised as having COPD. A FiO2 > 0.28 is 
often initiated before admission and continued in the ED. A larger study would 
be required to assess any possible harm of this approach, but education of those 
involved in the care of COPD patients may reduce the risk of complications of 
hypercapnia.

© 2015 Royal Australasian College of Physicians.

DOI: 10.1111/imj.12727
PMID: 25682723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2010 Mar;73(1):34-43. doi: 10.4081/monaldi.2010.311.

Long-term oxygen therapy in COPD: evidences and open questions of current 
indications.

Corrado A(1), Renda T, Bertini S.

Author information:
(1)Terapia Intensiva Pneumologica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Careggi 
Firenze, Italy. acorrado@qubisoft.it

Long term oxygen therapy (LTOT) has been shown to improve the survival rate in 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) patients with severe resting 
hypoxemia by NOTT and MRC studies, published more than 25 years ago. The 
improved survival was found in patients who received oxygen for more than 15 
hours/day. The effectiveness of LTOT has been documented only in stable COPD 
patients with severe chronic hypoxemia at rest (PaO2 < 55 mmHg (7.3 kPa) or PaO2 
ranging from 56 to 59 mmHg (7.4-7.8 kPa) in presence of signs of Cor Pulmonale, 
hematocrit > 55%. In fact no evidence supports the use of LTOT in COPD patients 
with moderate hypoxemia (55 < PaO2 < 65 mmHg), and in those with decreased 
oxygen saturation (SO 2 <90%) during exercise or sleep. Furthermore, it is 
generally accepted without evidence that LTOT in clinical practice is warranted 
in other forms of chronic respiratory failure not due to COPD when a-terial 
blood gas criteria match those established for COPD patients. The prescription 
of oxygen in these circumstances, as for unstable patients, increases the number 
of patients receiving supplemental oxygen and the related costs. Comorbidities 
are likely to affect both prognosis and health outcomes in COPD patients, but at 
the moment we do not know if LTOT in these patients with complex chronic 
diseases and mild-moderate hypoxemia could be of any use. For these reasons a 
critical revision of the actual guide lines indications for LTOT in order to 
optimise effectiveness and costs, and future research in the areas that have not 
previously been addressed by NOTT and MRC studies, are mandatory.

DOI: 10.4081/monaldi.2010.311
PMID: 20499792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Manag Care. 2018 Feb 1;24(2):e45-e53.

Claims-based risk model for first severe COPD exacerbation.

Stanford RH(1), Nag A, Mapel DW, Lee TA, Rosiello R, Schatz M, Vekeman F, 
Gauthier-Loiselle M, Merrigan JFP, Duh MS.

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, 5 Moore Dr, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. Email: 
richard.h.stanford@gsk.com.

OBJECTIVES: To develop and validate a predictive model for first severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation using health insurance claims 
data and to validate the risk measure of controller medication to total COPD 
treatment (controller and rescue) ratio (CTR).
STUDY DESIGN: A predictive model was developed and validated in 2 managed care 
databases: Truven Health MarketScan database and Reliant Medical Group database. 
This secondary analysis assessed risk factors, including CTR, during the 
baseline period (Year 1) to predict risk of severe exacerbation in the at-risk 
period (Year 2).
METHODS: Patients with COPD who were 40 years or older and who had at least 1 
COPD medication dispensed during the year following COPD diagnosis were 
included. Subjects with severe exacerbations in the baseline year were excluded. 
Risk factors in the baseline period were included as potential predictors in 
multivariate analysis. Performance was evaluated using C-statistics.
RESULTS: The analysis included 223,824 patients. The greatest risk factors for 
first severe exacerbation were advanced age, chronic oxygen therapy usage, COPD 
diagnosis type, dispensing of 4 or more canisters of rescue medication, and 
having 2 or more moderate exacerbations. A CTR of 0.3 or greater was associated 
with a 14% lower risk of severe exacerbation. The model performed well with 
C-statistics, ranging from 0.711 to 0.714.
CONCLUSIONS: This claims-based risk model can predict the likelihood of first 
severe COPD exacerbation. The CTR could also potentially be used to target 
populations at greatest risk for severe exacerbations. This could be relevant 
for providers and payers in approaches to prevent severe exacerbations and 
reduce costs.

PMID: 29461849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2016 Jan 7;26:15072. doi: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2015.72.

The practicalities of living with oxygen: a perspective from a person living 
with COPD.

Smith V(1).

Author information:
(1)European Lung Foundation, Sheffield, UK.

Although I welcomed oxygen into my life, it required a degree of adjustment and 
perseverance. The concentrator told all visitors that this was the home of a 
'patient', and using ambulatory oxygen in public takes a lot of getting used to. 
Safe use of oxygen entailed some changes in routine activities, and travel needs 
to be planned ahead to ensure that I don't run out of oxygen. Despite its 
drawbacks, oxygen has enabled me to have a full and active life once again.

DOI: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2015.72
PMCID: PMC4704533
PMID: 26741739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Crit Care Med. 2019 Jun;47(6):e506-e511. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000003740.

High-Flow Oxygen Therapy After Noninvasive Ventilation Interruption in Patients 
Recovering From Hypercapnic Acute Respiratory Failure: A Physiological Crossover 
Trial.

Longhini F(1), Pisani L(2), Lungu R(3), Comellini V(2), Bruni A(4), Garofalo 
E(4), Laura Vega M(2), Cammarota G(3), Nava S(2), Navalesi P(4).

Author information:
(1)Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Sant'Andrea Hospital, ASL VC, Vercelli, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical, Integrated and Experimental Medicine (DIMES), 
Respiratory and Critical Care Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Alma Mater 
University, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Maggiore della Carità Hospital, Novara, Italy.
(4)Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital Mater Domini, Department of Medical 
and Surgical Sciences, Magna Graecia University, Catanzaro, Italy.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2019 Oct;47(10):e846-e847.
    Crit Care Med. 2019 Oct;47(10):e847-e848.
    Crit Care Med. 2020 Jan;48(1):e76.
    Crit Care Med. 2020 Jan;48(1):e76-e77.

OBJECTIVES: Assessing gas exchange, diaphragm function, respiratory rate, and 
patient comfort during high-flow oxygen therapy and standard oxygen at the time 
of noninvasive ventilation discontinuation.
DESIGN: Randomized crossover physiologic study.
SETTING: Two ICUs.
PATIENTS: Thirty chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients with hypercapnic 
acute respiratory failure receiving noninvasive ventilation greater than 24 
hours.
INTERVENTIONS: All patients underwent five 30-minute trials, the first, third, 
and fifth trial in noninvasive ventilation, whereas the second and fourth were 
randomly conducted with either standard oxygen and high-flow oxygen therapy.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Diaphragm displacement and thickening fraction 
were determined by sonographic evaluation at the end of each trial. Arterial 
blood gases, respiratory rate, and patient comfort were also assessed. PaCO2 (p 
= 0.153) and pH (p = 0.114) were not different among trials, while PaO2 was 
greater in noninvasive ventilation than with both standard oxygen (p ≤ 0.005) 
and high-flow oxygen therapy (p ≤ 0.001). The diaphragm displacement was no 
different among trials (p = 0.875), while its thickening fraction was greater 
with standard oxygen, compared with high-flow oxygen therapy and all noninvasive 
ventilation trials (p < 0.001 for all comparisons), without differences between 
high-flow oxygen therapy and noninvasive ventilation. Respiratory rate also 
increased with standard oxygen, compared with both high-flow oxygen therapy (p < 
0.001) and noninvasive ventilation (p < 0.01). High-flow oxygen therapy improved 
comfort, compared with standard oxygen (p = 0.004) and noninvasive ventilation 
(p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: At the time of noninvasive ventilation interruption, PaCO2 and 
diaphragm displacement remained unchanged regardless of the modality of oxygen 
administration. However, although standard oxygen resulted in a remarkable 
increase in diaphragm thickening fraction, high-flow oxygen therapy allowed 
maintaining it unchanged, while improving patient comfort.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000003740
PMID: 30882477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. COPD. 2012 Feb;9(1):3-11. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2011.630048.

Influence of lightweight ambulatory oxygen on oxygen use and activity patterns 
of COPD patients receiving long-term oxygen therapy.

Casaburi R(1), Porszasz J, Hecht A, Tiep B, Albert RK, Anthonisen NR, Bailey WC, 
Connett JE, Cooper JA Jr, Criner GJ, Curtis J, Dransfield M, Lazarus SC, Make B, 
Martinez FJ, McEvoy C, Niewoehner DE, Reilly JJ, Scanlon P, Scharf SM, Sciurba 
FC, Woodruff P; COPD Clinical Research Network.

Collaborators: Reilly JJ Jr, Washko G, Peterson S, Mayo C, Albert RK, Make B, 
Welsh C, Gilmartin M, Verano C, Casaburi R, Porszasz J, Love RD, Criner GJ, 
Chatila W, Marchetti N, Kim V, D'Alonzo G, Krachman S, Cordova F, Brennan K, 
Patel N, Mamary J, Grabianowski C, Krayger N, Criner H, Bailey WC, Cooper JA, 
Dransfield MT, Gerald LB, O'Reilly P, Tidwell S, Lazarus SC, Boushey HA, 
Woodruff PG, Sakurai R, Nguyen C, Scharf SM, Alattar M, Amelung P, Cowan M, 
Hanson J, Hasday J, Iacono A, Shanholtz C, Todd N, Verceles A, Bell-Farrell W, 
Fitzgerald T, Wood P, Martinez FJ, Curtis J, Han MK, Christensen P, Baptist K, 
Flaherty C, Getty C, Jett C, McCloskey L, Thompson D, White D, Sciurba F, Folger 
R, Filippino D, Niewoehner DE, McEvoy C, Scanlon PD, Rice KR, Bourassa CB, 
Neuenfeldt P, Connett JE, Anthonisen NR, Wendt C, Patrek W, Voelker H, Skeans M, 
Bender BB, Kelsey SF, Landis JR, Phillips B, Turino GM, Veatch R, Waldo A, 
Wanner A, Kelly HW, Maurer J, McSweeny AJ, Senior RM, Thom EA, Wagner PD, 
ZuWallack RL, Weinmann G, Croxton T, Punturieri A, Stylianou MP.

Author information:
(1)Rehabilitation Clinical Trials Center, Los Angeles Biomedical Research 
Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California, USA. 
casaburi@ucla.edu

Lightweight ambulatory oxygen devices are provided on the assumptions that they 
enhance compliance and increase activity, but data to support these assumptions 
are lacking. We studied 22 patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease receiving long-term oxygen therapy (14 men, average age = 66.9 y, FEV(1) 
= 33.6%pred, PaO(2) at rest = 51.7 torr) who were using E-cylinders as their 
portable oxygen. Subjects were recruited at 5 sites and studied over a 2-week 
baseline period and for 6 months after randomizing them to either continuing to 
use 22-lb E-cylinders towed on a cart or to carrying 3.6-lb aluminum cylinders. 
Utilizing novel electronic devices, ambulatory and stationary oxygen use was 
monitored continuously over the 2 weeks prior to and the 6 months following 
randomization. Subjects wore tri-axial accelerometers to monitor physical 
activity during waking hours for 2-3 weeks prior to, and at 3 and 6 months 
after, randomization. Seventeen subjects completed the study. At baseline, 
subjects used 17.2 hours of stationary and 2.5 hours of ambulatory oxygen daily. 
At 6 months, ambulatory oxygen use was 1.4 ± 1.0 hrs in those randomized to 
E-cylinders and 1.9 ± 2.4 hrs in those using lightweight oxygen (P = NS). 
Activity monitoring revealed low activity levels prior to randomization and no 
significant increase over time in either group. In this group of severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease patients, providing lightweight ambulatory oxygen 
did not increase either oxygen use or activity. Future efforts might focus on 
strategies to encourage oxygen use and enhance activity in this patient group. 
This trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT003257540).

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2011.630048
PMID: 22292592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Sep 29;11:2427-2434. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S112473. eCollection 2016.

An in silico analysis of oxygen uptake of a mild COPD patient during rest and 
exercise using a portable oxygen concentrator.

Katz I(1), Pichelin M(2), Montesantos S(2), Kang MY(3), Sapoval B(4), Zhu K(5), 
Thevenin CP(5), McCoy R(6), Martin AR(7), Caillibotte G(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical R&D, Air Liquide Santé International, Centre de Recherche 
Paris-Saclay, Les Loges-en-Josas, France; Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
Lafayette College, Easton, PA, USA.
(2)Medical R&D, Air Liquide Santé International, Centre de Recherche 
Paris-Saclay, Les Loges-en-Josas, France.
(3)Physique de la Matière Condensée, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau.
(4)Physique de la Matière Condensée, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau; 
Centre de Mathématiques et de leurs Applications, CNRS, UniverSud, Cachan.
(5)Centre Explor!, Air Liquide Healthcare, Gentilly, France.
(6)Valley Inspired Products, Inc, Apple Valley, MN, USA.
(7)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, 
Canada.

Oxygen treatment based on intermittent-flow devices with pulse delivery modes 
available from portable oxygen concentrators (POCs) depends on the 
characteristics of the delivered pulse such as volume, pulse width (the time of 
the pulse to be delivered), and pulse delay (the time for the pulse to be 
initiated from the start of inhalation) as well as a patient's breathing 
characteristics, disease state, and respiratory morphology. This article 
presents a physiological-based analysis of the performance, in terms of blood 
oxygenation, of a commercial POC at different settings using an in silico model 
of a COPD patient at rest and during exercise. The analysis encompasses 
experimental measurements of pulse volume, width, and time delay of the POC at 
three different settings and two breathing rates related to rest and exercise. 
These experimental data of device performance are inputs to a 
physiological-based model of oxygen uptake that takes into account the real 
dynamic nature of gas exchange to illustrate how device- and patient-specific 
factors can affect patient oxygenation. This type of physiological analysis that 
considers the true effectiveness of oxygen transfer to the blood, as opposed to 
delivery to the nose (or mouth), can be instructive in applying therapies and 
designing new devices.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S112473
PMCID: PMC5047718
PMID: 27729783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Respir Med. 2015 Apr;109(4):500-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.01.005. Epub 2015 
Jan 28.

Assessment of health status and program performance in patients on long-term 
oxygen therapy.

Hernandez C(1), Aibar J(2), de Batlle J(3), Gomez-Cabrero D(4), Soler N(2), 
Duran-Tauleria E(5), Garcia-Aymerich J(5), Altimiras X(6), Gomez M(2), Agustí 
A(2), Escarrabill J(7), Font D(2), Roca J(2); NEXES Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, CIBER en Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat 
de Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; Master Plan for Respiratory Diseases (PDMAR) and 
Respiratory Therapies Observatory (ObsTRD), Ministry of Health and REDISSEC 
(Research Network in Chronic Care), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. Electronic 
address: chernan@clinic.ub.es.
(2)Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, CIBER en Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat 
de Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(3)International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), Lyon, France.
(4)Unit of Computational Medicine, Department of Medicine, Center for Molecular 
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Sweden.
(5)Centre de Recerca en Epidemiologia Ambiental (CREAL), CIBER en Epidemiologia 
y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Department of experimental and Health Sciences, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(6)Consorci Sanitari de Barcelona, Servei Català de la Salut, Generalitat de 
Catalunya, Spain.
(7)Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, CIBER en Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat 
de Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; Master Plan for Respiratory Diseases (PDMAR) and 
Respiratory Therapies Observatory (ObsTRD), Ministry of Health and REDISSEC 
(Research Network in Chronic Care), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Despite well established clinical guidelines, performance of 
long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) programs shows marked variability among 
territories. The current study assessed the LTOT program and the health status 
of patients on LTOT prior to the deployment of community-based integrated care 
in an urban health district of Barcelona (Spain).
AIMS: To assess: i) the LTOT program and health status of the patients on LTOT 
in the health district; ii) their frailty profile; and, iii) the requirements 
for effective deployment of integrated care services for these patients.
METHODS: Cross-sectional observational study design including all patients 
(n = 406) on LTOT living in the health district. Health status, frailty, 
arterial blood gases, forced spirometry and hand-grip muscle strength were 
measured. Network analysis of frailty was carried out.
RESULTS: Adequacy of LTOT prescription (n = 362): 47% and 31% of the patients 
had PaO2 ≤ 60 mmHg and ≤55 mmHg, respectively. Adherence to LTOT: 31% of all 
patients used LTOT ≥15 h/d; this figure increased to 67% in those with 
PaO2≤60 mmHg. Assessment of frailty: Overall, LTOT patients presented moderate 
to severe frailty. Care complexity was observed in 42% of the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Adequacy and adherence to LTOT was poor and many patients were 
frail and complex. The outcomes of the network analysis may contribute to 
enhance assessment of frailty in LTOT patients. These observations suggest that 
an integrated care strategy has the potential to improve the health outcomes of 
these patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.01.005
PMID: 25771036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2015 Jun;9(3):287-93. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2015.1016503. 
Epub 2015 May 15.

Oxygen therapy in acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Pilcher J(1), Weatherall M, Perrin K, Beasley R.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, Private Bag 7902, Wellington 6242, 
New Zealand.

During the last decade, there have been major advances in knowledge of the 
effects of oxygen therapy in patients with acute exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. This includes a randomised controlled trial of 
oxygen therapy in the pre-hospital setting, which showed that high concentration 
oxygen therapy leads to a 2.4-fold increased risk of mortality compared with 
titrated oxygen therapy to maintain oxygen saturations (SpO2) within a target 
range of 88-92%. Professional guidelines now recommend the use of supplementary 
oxygen in acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease only if 
the SpO2 is less than 88%, with titration to achieve an SpO2 of 88-92%, and the 
delivery of bronchodilators by air-driven nebulisation or metered dose inhaler 
with a spacer. The aim of this review is to provide an overview of the evidence 
base that underpins these recommendations. We suggest that their implementation 
will require important changes to current clinical practice in which there is an 
entrenched culture of the use of high concentration oxygen therapy.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2015.1016503
PMID: 25979080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2011 Dec;75(4):207-14. doi: 10.4081/monaldi.2011.208.

Advanced COPD patients under home mechanical ventilation and/or long term oxygen 
therapy: Italian healthcare costs.

Vitacca M(1), Bianchi L, Bazza A, Clini EM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Rehabilitation, Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri, IRCCS, 
Lumezzane (BS), Italy. vitacca@fsm.it

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Little information is available on healthcare costs for 
patients with very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The aim of the 
current work was to evaluate Italian healthcare costs in these patients.
METHODS: Prospective 1-year analysis was assessed in three subgroups of 
patients; non-invasively ventilated (n=30); invasively-ventilated (n=12) and on 
long-term oxygen therapy (n=41). Acute costs for care were a sum of fees for 
doctor's consultations, admissions to hospital (ward and intensive care units) 
and emergency drugs. Chronic costs were the sum of costs for pharmacotherapy and 
home ventilation and/or oxygen care.
RESULTS: Mean cost/day/patient was 96 +/- 112 Euro (range 9-526 Euro), with 
acute costs accounting for 72% and chronic costs for 28% of the total cost 
burden, with no significant differences in costs associated with the three 
subgroups. Acute costs had a non-normal distribution (range 0 to 510 Euro) being 
cost for hospitalisation the highest cost burden with more than 30% of acute 
care costs attributed to only a small segment of patients. Chronic care costs 
were also unevenly distributed among the various groups (ANOVA p = 0.006), being 
home oxygen supply the highest cost burden.
CONCLUSIONS: The current Health Care System is in urgent need for a reassessment 
of the high cost burden associated with hospitalisations and home oxygen supply.

DOI: 10.4081/monaldi.2011.208
PMID: 22462308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Oct 30;12:3159-3169. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S140264. eCollection 2017.

A nationwide structure for valid long-term oxygen therapy: 29-year prospective 
data in Sweden.

Ekström M(1)(2), Ahmadi Z(1), Larsson H(1), Nilsson T(2), Wahlberg J(2), Ström 
KE(1), Midgren B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Respiratory Medicine & 
Allergology, Lund University, Lund.
(2)Department of Medicine, Blekinge Hospital, Karlskrona, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) improves prognosis in COPD with 
severe hypoxemia. However, adherence to criteria for eligibility and quality of 
LTOT is often insufficient and varies between countries. The aim of this study 
was to evaluate a national structure for prescription and management of LTOT 
over three decades in Sweden.
METHODS: The study was a prospective, population-based study of 23,909 patients 
on LTOT from 1987 to 2015 in the Swedish National Register of Respiratory 
Failure (Swedevox). We assessed the prevalence, incidence, and structure of 
LTOT; completeness of registration in Swedevox; and validity of prescription and 
management of LTOT in Sweden according to seven published quality indicators.
RESULTS: LTOT was prescribed by 48 respiratory or medicine units and managed 
mainly by specialized oxygen nurses. Swedevox had a stable completeness of 85% 
of patients starting LTOT since 1987. The national incidence of LTOT increased 
from 3.9 to 14.7/100,000 inhabitants over the time period. In 2015, 2,596 
patients had ongoing therapeutic LTOT in the registry, a national prevalence of 
31.6/100,000. Adherence to prescription recommendations and fulfillment of 
quality criteria was stable or improved over time. Of patients starting LTOT in 
2015, 88% had severe hypoxemia (partial pressure of arterial oxygen [PaO2] <7.4 
kPa) and 97% had any degree of hypoxemia (PaO2 <8.0 kPa); 98% were prescribed 
oxygen ≥15 hours/day or more; 76% had both stationary and mobile oxygen 
equipment; 75% had a mean PaO2 >8.0 kPa breathing oxygen; and 98% were 
non-smokers.
CONCLUSION: We present a structure for prescription, management, and follow-up 
of LTOT. The national registry effectively monitored adherence to prescription 
recommendations and most likely contributed to improved quality of care.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S140264
PMCID: PMC5669791
PMID: 29133978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


78. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Dec 14;13:3997-4003. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S183762. eCollection 2018.

Automated oxygen control with O2matic(®) during admission with exacerbation of 
COPD.

Hansen EF(1), Hove JD(1), Bech CS(1), Jensen JS(2), Kallemose T(3), Vestbo J(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical Unit, Amager and Hvidovre Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 
ejvind.frausing.hansen@regionh.dk.
(2)Medical Department, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Clinical Research Center, Amager and Hvidovre Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester and Manchester 
University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.

PURPOSE: It is a challenge to control oxygen saturation (SpO2) in patients with 
exacerbations of COPD during admission. We tested a newly developed closed-loop 
system, O2matic®, and its ability to keep SpO2 within a specified interval 
compared with manual control by nursing staff.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a crossover trial with patients admitted with 
an exacerbation of COPD and hypoxemia (SpO2 ≤88% on room air). Patients were 
monitored with continuous measurement of SpO2. In random order, they had 4 hours 
with manually controlled oxygen and 4 hours with oxygen delivery controlled by 
O2matic. Primary outcome was time within a prespecified SpO2 target interval. 
Secondary outcomes were time with SpO2 <85%, time with SpO2 below target but not 
<85%, and time with SpO2 above target.
RESULTS: Twenty patients were randomized and 19 completed the study. Mean age 
was 72.4 years and mean FEV1 was 0.72 L (33% of predicted). Patients with 
O2matic-controlled treatment were within the SpO2 target interval in 85.1% of 
the time vs 46.6% with manually controlled treatment (P<0.001). Time with SpO2 
<85% was 1.3% with O2matic and 17.9% with manual control (P=0.01). Time with 
SpO2 below target but not <85% was 9.0% with O2matic and 25.0% with manual 
control (P=0.002). Time with SpO2 above target was not significantly different 
between treatments (4.6% vs 10.5%, P=0.2). Patients expressed high confidence 
and a sense of safety with automatic oxygen delivery.
CONCLUSION: O2matic was able to effectively control SpO2 for patients admitted 
with an exacerbation of COPD. O2matic was significantly better than manual 
control to maintain SpO2 within target interval and to reduce time with 
unintended hypoxemia.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S183762
PMCID: PMC6300382
PMID: 30587955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure EFH and JDH are co-inventors of 
O2matic® and both have participated in the development and testing of the device 
since 2011. The partnership, which was built during the development funded by 
Innovation Fund Denmark, formed a new company (O2matic Ltd., Herlev, Denmark) 
and both EFH and JDH participate as shareholders in O2matic Ltd. Jørgen Vestbo 
is supported by the NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Center. The authors 
report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


79. Eur J Med Res. 2008 Oct 27;13(10):451-8.

Oxygen generation by combined electrolysis and fuel-cell technology: clinical 
use in COPD patients requiring long time oxygen therapy.

Hirche TO(1), Born T, Jungblut S, Sczepanski B, Kenn K, Köhnlein T, Hirche H, 
Wagner TO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University Hospital Frankfurt, Theodor 
Stern Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Oxy-Gen lite, a recently developed combined electrolysis and fuel 
cell technology, de-novo generates oxygen with high purity for medical use from 
distilled water and room air. However, its use in patients with chronic 
respiratory failure has never been evaluated.
OBJECTIVES: To test the clinical applicability and safety of Oxy-Gen lite 
technology, we enrolled 32 COPD patients with chronic hypoxemia and long-term 
oxygen therapy (LTOT) in a controlled, randomized, multicenter clinical trial.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Standard continuous oxygen therapy with a maximal flow 
rate of 2 L/min was tested against pulsatile oxygen delivery by Oxy-Gen lite. 
Oxygen saturation at seated-rest was recorded over 30 min and used as a primary 
read-out parameter. Oxygen saturation was also recorded during mild physical 
strain (speaking out loud) or overnight's sleep.
RESULTS: Both methods of oxygen supply established oxygen saturations within the 
normal range (i.e., upper plateau of the sigmoid oxyhaemoglobin dissociation 
curve) compared to breathing room air (p<0.0001). Mean oxygen saturation under 
standard continuous oxygen flow or Oxy-Gen lite technology during rest, physical 
strain or sleep proved statistically equivalent (95%CI<2.5% of reference 
saturation).
CONCLUSION: The use of Oxy-Gen lite in COPD patients with hypoxemia and LTOT 
<or= 2 L/min is safe and results in oxygen saturation comparable to standard 
oxygen therapy. There is evidence that this form of oxygen supply is not only 
functional during rest but also during mild physical strain or overnight's 
sleep. Low noise, energy- and overhead-costs are particular advantages of this 
technology.

PMID: 19008171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Respirology. 2019 Apr;24(4):329-337. doi: 10.1111/resp.13457. Epub 2018 Dec 17.

Comparison of continuous flow versus demand oxygen delivery systems in patients 
with COPD: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Gloeckl R(1)(2), Osadnik C(3)(4), Bies L(2), Leitl D(1), Koczulla AR(1)(5), Kenn 
K(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Pulmonary Rehabilitation Research, Schoen Klinik 
Berchtesgadener Land, Schoenau am Koenigssee, Germany.
(2)Department of Prevention, Rehabilitation and Sports Medicine, Technical 
University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Physiotherapy, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(4)Monash Health, Monash Lung and Sleep, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Rehabilitation, Philipps-University of Marburg, 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Respirology. 2019 Apr;24(4):294-295.

Demand oxygen delivery systems (DODS) enable prolongation of liquid oxygen 
cylinder life compared to continuous oxygen flow (CONT) use. Evidence is 
lacking, however, regarding their efficacy. This study investigated the 
literature comparing liquid-based CONT to DODS in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Four electronic databases were searched 
from 1980 until January 2018. Primary outcomes were oxyhaemoglobin saturation 
(SpO2 %) at rest and during exercise and exercise performance. Risk of bias was 
evaluated using the Cochrane tool. Data were analysed via meta-analysis where 
possible using the generic inverse variance method in Revman 5.3 or narrative 
synthesis. Ten crossover trials involving 152 patients with moderate to severe 
COPD (forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1 ) range: 27-42% predicted) were 
included. There was a large degree of uncertainty regarding potential bias 
related to allocation concealment and blinding for all studies. Data from three 
studies (n = 44) showed no significant differences between DODS and CONT in 
terms of SpO2 % at rest -0.2% (95% CI: -0.5% to 0.1%) or during exercise -0.3% 
(95% CI: -2.1% to 1.5%). The pooled mean difference of two studies (n = 56) in 
6-min walk distance was 5.7 m (95% CI: -14.4 to 25.8 m). Findings were 
consistent between the meta-analysis and narrative synthesis. These findings 
from a limited number of studies suggest oxygen delivery via DODS or CONT 
confers similar effects in terms of SpO2 % or exercise performance in patients 
with COPD. However, as DODS devices use various specifications that may yield 
large intra-individual differences, individual SpO2 % testing appears advisable 
for those considering DODS use.

© 2018 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13457
PMID: 30556614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Chest. 2002 Aug;122(2):451-6. doi: 10.1378/chest.122.2.451.

Refillable oxygen cylinders may be an alternative for ambulatory oxygen therapy 
in COPD.

Cuvelier A(1), Nuir JF, Chakroun N, Aboab J, Onea G, Benhamou D.

Author information:
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital de Bois-Guillaume, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, 
France. antoine.cuvelier@chu-rouen.fr

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To compare, in clinical conditions, the efficacy of refilled 
oxygen cylinders (O2-HFs) in improving oxygenation and exercise capacity of 
patients with COPD during a 6-min walking test.
DESIGN: Prospective randomized study with a cross-over design.
SETTING: A university teaching hospital.
PATIENTS: Ten patients with COPD, in a stable state and previously treated with 
long-term domiciliary oxygen therapy. Baseline characteristics were as follows: 
age, 65 +/- 7 years; PaO2 on room air, 55.4 +/- 6.3 mm Hg; PaCO2 on room air, 
46.2 +/- 7.4 mm Hg; FEV1/vital capacity, 47 +/- 7%; and FEV1, 30 +/- 7% of 
predicted value (mean +/- SD).
DESIGN: All patients performed three successive 6-min walking tests, the first 
test in room air and the other tests in a randomized order with either a 
conventional oxygen cylinder (O2-C) or an O2-HF.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: The fraction of inspired oxygen (FIO2) delivered by 
O2-HFs was significantly lower than the FIO2 delivered by O2-Cs (94.2 +/- 2.6% 
vs 98.8 +/- 4.9%, p = 0.02). Mean O2-HF and O2-C weights before the walking 
tests were similar (3,510 +/- 251 g and 3,770 +/- 142 g, respectively; p = 
0.09). Mean transcutaneous oxygen saturation was similarly improved with both 
oxygen delivery systems. Mean distances with O2-C (373.5 +/- 81 m) and O2-HF 
(375 +/- 97 m) were not different but significantly improved, as compared with 
room air (334.5 +/- 90 m; p = 0.03 and 0.02, respectively). Dyspnea sensations 
were similar for the three tests.
CONCLUSION: O2-HFs are as efficient as O2-Cs for performing short-term 
exercises. Because of a lower cost, pressurizing units may be worthwhile for 
improving ambulatory oxygen therapy and pulmonary rehabilitation programs.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.122.2.451
PMID: 12171816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Intern Med J. 2018 Nov;48(11):1376-1381. doi: 10.1111/imj.13737.

Characteristics of patients who progress from bridging to long-term oxygen 
therapy.

Levin K(1), Borg B(1), Miller B(1)(2), Kee K(1)(3), Dabscheck E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Medicine Department, The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Respiratory Medicine Department, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Patients with persistent hypoxia following an acute hospital 
admission may be discharged with 'bridging' domiciliary oxygen as per criteria 
defined by the Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand. The need for 
continuous long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) is then reassessed at a clinic review 
1-2 months later.
AIM: To describe the characteristics of patients discharged from an acute 
hospital admission with continuous short-term oxygen therapy (STOT), and 
subsequently to investigate for differences between subjects who proceeded to 
qualify for continuous LTOT versus those who were able to cease STOT at review.
METHODS: This is a retrospective cohort study involving all subjects discharged 
from Alfred Health between 2011 and 2015 inclusive with bridging domiciliary 
oxygen. Multiple biochemical, physiological and demographic characteristics were 
collated and analysed.
RESULTS: Of all patients prescribed continuous STOT at time of discharge, 47.3% 
qualified for LTOT at outpatient review. This cohort had a significantly lower 
PaO2 measurement at time of discharge, compared with those who no longer 
qualified.
CONCLUSION: PaO2 at time of discharge provides a signal with the potential to 
identify who will require continuous LTOT following an acute hospital admission. 
Additionally, this study highlights the need to re-evaluate patients' oxygen 
requirements during a period of clinical stability.

© 2018 Royal Australasian College of Physicians.

DOI: 10.1111/imj.13737
PMID: 29345397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Perspect Psychiatr Care. 2018 Jan;54(1):6-10. doi: 10.1111/ppc.12169. Epub 2016 
May 25.

Major Depression in Long-Term Oxygen Therapy Dependent Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease.

Kayhan F(1), Ilik F(2), Karamanli H(3), Cemal Pazarli A(4), Kayhan A(5).

Author information:
(1)Fatih Kayhan, MD, is Psychiatrist, Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Psychiatry, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey.
(2)Faik İlik, MD, is Neurologist, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, 
Başkent University, Konya, Turkey.
(3)Harun Karamanli, MD, is Chest Disease Specialist, Department of Chest 
Diseases, Chest Disease and Chest Surgery Training and Research Hospital, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Ahmet Cemal Pazarli, MD, is Chest Disease Specialist, Department of Chest 
Diseases, Elbistan State Hospital, Kahramanmaraş, Turkey.
(5)Ayşegül Kayhan, MD, is Radiologist, Department of Radiology, Konya Training 
and Research Hospital, Konya, Turkey.

PURPOSE: We aimed to investigate the frequency of major depression (MD) in 
long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) dependent chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) patients and the effect of depression on patients' compliance with the 
treatment.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Fifty-four consecutive patients were enrolled in the study 
and diagnosed as stage 4 COPD according to Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease guideline. MD was diagnosed with the Structured 
Clinical Interview for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, Fourth Edition/Clinical Version.
FINDINGS: Thirty-four (63.0%) patients had MD. MD frequency was significantly 
higher in patients who were noncompliant with LTOT compared with compliant 
patients.
PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: MD is a common psychiatric disorder in COPD patients 
receiving LTOT.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/ppc.12169
PMID: 27220917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Chron Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;16:1479972318767724. doi: 
10.1177/1479972318767724. Epub 2018 Apr 9.

Adherence to long-term oxygen therapy in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Gauthier A(1), Bernard S(1), Bernard E(1), Simard S(1), Maltais F(1), Lacasse 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche, Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie 
de Québec - Université Laval, Québec, Canada.

Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) has beneficial effects on survival in patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe hypoxemia at rest. 
Two landmark trials suggested that these benefits depend on the time of exposure 
to oxygen. Patients are usually prescribed LTOT for at least 15-18 hours/day. 
The primary objective of this study was to determine the average daily exposure 
to supplemental oxygen in patients with severely hypoxemic COPD who were newly 
prescribed LTOT and the proportion of patients who were adherent to their 
prescription. The secondary objective was to identify predictors of compliance 
to LTOT. We performed a retrospective observational study of patients newly 
registered in a regional home oxygen program in Quebec, Canada, between July 1, 
2013, and December 31, 2014. Daily exposure to oxygen was objectively measured 
from the concentrator's counter clock. From 196 patients registered in the 
program during the study period, 115 contributed to the analysis. Most patients 
( n = 84; 73%) were prescribed oxygen for ≥18 hours/day. Overall, the 115 
patients were exposed to home oxygen for 17.8 hours/day; 60% of the patients 
were compliant according to our definition. Increasing age and ambulatory oxygen 
utilization predicted adherence to oxygen therapy. Adherence to home oxygen 
therapy is suboptimal. Behavioral and psychological interventions to improve 
compliance to LTOT should be investigated.

DOI: 10.1177/1479972318767724
PMCID: PMC6302966
PMID: 29631423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


85. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jun 18;14:1299-1304. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S204391. eCollection 2019.

Patient registries for home oxygen research and evaluation.

Lacasse Y(1), Krishnan JA(2), Maltais F(1), Ekström M(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Center, Quebec University Institute of Cardiology and Pulmonology, 
Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, Department of 
Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Respiratory 
Medicine and Allergology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Randomized clinical trials are the preferred study design to address key 
research questions about the benefits or harms of interventions. However, 
randomized trials of oxygen therapy are difficult to conduct and have 
limitations. The purpose of this article is to offer our view on the potential 
use of patient registries in the field of home oxygen in COPD as an alternative 
to randomized trials by referring to the Swedish experience with a national 
registry for respiratory failure. Patient registries use observational study 
methods to collect uniform data (clinical and other) to evaluate specified 
outcomes for a population defined by a particular disease, condition, or 
exposure. As opposed to administrative databases, patient registries serve one 
or more predetermined scientific, clinical, or policy purposes. By 
systematically and prospectively compiling relevant data, patient registries may 
describe the natural history of a disease, determine effectiveness and 
cost-effectiveness, assess safety or harm, and measure quality of care. 
Registry-based randomized trials (ie, randomized trials within a clinical 
registry) combine the advantages of a prospective randomized trial with the 
strengths of a large-scale all-comers clinical registry. Challenges and issues 
in the design and implementation of patient registries include the 
representativeness of participants, data collection, quality assurance, 
ownership, and governance. Notwithstanding their limitations, patient registries 
represent valuable tools in the conduct of research in the area of home oxygen 
therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S204391
PMCID: PMC6592017
PMID: 31417247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Jerry A. Krishnan reports grants from 
the National Institutes of Health and Patient Centered Outcomes Research 
Institute during the conduct of the study. Dr Maltais reports grants and 
personal fees from Novartis and Boehringer Ingelheim, and grants from Sanofi, 
AstraZeneca and Grifols, outside the submitted work. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


86. Eur Respir J. 2004 Dec;24(6):954-7. doi: 10.1183/09031936.04.00089504.

Assessments for oxygen therapy in COPD: are we under correcting arterial oxygen 
tensions?

Dheda K(1), Lim K, Ollivere B, Leftley J, Lampe FC, Salisbury A, Dilworth JP, 
Rajakulasingam RK.

Author information:
(1)Dept of Respiratory and HIV Medicine, Royal Free Hospital, Pond Street, 
London, UK. k.dheda@ucl.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Eur Respir J. 2005 Apr;25(4):773. Rajakulasingum, RK [corrected to 
Rajakulasingam, RK].

There is little data about the use of different oxygen sources during assessment 
for long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) and how this impacts upon blood oxygen 
tensions and prescribed flow rates. Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), n=30, had assessments for LTOT using both an oxygen-concentrator 
and piped hospital oxygen (wall-oxygen) as supply sources. In addition, a random 
survey of 64 hospitals was conducted to determine what source of oxygen supply 
was used during assessments. Wall-oxygen was used by 89% of hospitals to perform 
assessments. During assessments, the median oxygen flow required to achieve an 
arterial oxygen tension (Pa,O2) >8 kPa was significantly greater for an 
oxygen-concentrator than for wall-oxygen, with a median difference (range) in 
flow of 1 (0-3) L. This difference was most likely in those with an forced 
expiratory volume <30% of predicted. At an oxygen flow of 1 L.min(-1), the mean 
P(a,O2) using an oxygen-concentrator was significantly lower than that of the 
wall-oxygen value, with a difference of 1.32+/-1.19 kPa (mean+/-SD). The common 
practice of using wall-oxygen to perform assessments significantly 
underestimates the required oxygen-concentrator flow rate. This may have 
implications for the long-term effect of domiciliary oxygen therapy.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.04.00089504
PMID: 15572538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Patient. 2016 Jun;9(3):271-9. doi: 10.1007/s40271-015-0150-z.

Patient Involvement in the Design of a Patient-Centered Clinical Trial to 
Promote Adherence to Supplemental Oxygen Therapy in COPD.

Holm KE(1)(2), Casaburi R(3), Cerreta S(4), Gussin HA(5), Husbands J(6), 
Porszasz J(3), Prieto-Centurion V(7), Sandhaus RA(8)(9)(10), Sullivan JL(4), 
Walsh LJ(4), Krishnan JA(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA. 
holmk@njhealth.org.
(2)Department of Community and Behavioral Health, Colorado School of Public 
Health, Aurora, CO, USA. holmk@njhealth.org.
(3)Rehabilitation Clinical Trials Center, Los Angeles Biomedical Research 
Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA, USA.
(4)COPD Foundation, Washington, DC, USA.
(5)Population Health Sciences Program, University of Illinois Hospital and 
Health Sciences System, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Apria Healthcare, Lake Forest, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(9)AlphaNet, Miami, FL, USA.
(10)Alpha-1 Foundation, Miami, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Patients are increasingly viewed as key stakeholders who can 
contribute in meaningful ways to clinical research and are emphasized in 
research funded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI). We 
are not aware of other peer-reviewed publications that report methods and 
outcomes of patient engagement to refine study design for a PCORI-sponsored 
clinical effectiveness trial.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this report was to describe the process and outcomes of 
involving patients in the design of a clinical trial to promote adherence to 
supplemental oxygen therapy among patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.
METHODS: In-person focus groups and individual discussions via telephone and 
email were used to elicit feedback to refine the intervention and clarify 
outcomes of highest importance to patients.
RESULTS: A total of 25 patients and five caregivers provided feedback. Their 
feedback has informed decisions regarding the length of intervention sessions 
(20 min and in some cases longer was acceptable), the importance of including 
caregivers, and discussion topics (e.g., social discomfort about using oxygen in 
public, identifying personally relevant reasons to use oxygen, pulmonary 
rehabilitation). Multiple outcomes were rated as highly important to patients 
(physical function, fatigue, sleep, anxiety, depression, and ability to 
participate in social roles and activities), and the outcome that was ranked as 
most important varied by individual. Therefore, multiple patient-reported 
outcomes will be used as endpoints for the clinical trial.
CONCLUSIONS: Patient involvement led to refinements of the intervention and 
clinical trial endpoints to better address the expressed needs and concerns of 
patients and caregivers.

DOI: 10.1007/s40271-015-0150-z
PMID: 26521057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Respir Care. 2019 Feb;64(2):117-129. doi: 10.4187/respcare.06359. Epub 2019 Jan 
29.

In Vitro-In Silico Comparison of Pulsed Oxygen Delivery From Portable Oxygen 
Concentrators Versus Continuous Flow Oxygen Delivery.

Chen JZ(1), Katz IM(2), Pichelin M(2), Zhu K(3), Caillibotte G(2), Finlay WH(4), 
Martin AR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
Alberta, Canada. jzc@ualberta.ca.
(2)Medical R&D, Air Liquide Santé International, Centre de Recherche 
Paris-Saclay, Les Loges-en-Josas, France.
(3)Centre Explor!, Air Liquide Healthcare, Gentilly, France.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
Alberta, Canada.

Comment in
    Respir Care. 2019 Feb;64(2):230-232.

BACKGROUND: Portable oxygen concentrators (POCs) deliver oxygen in intermittent 
pulses. The challenge of establishing equivalence between continuous flow oxygen 
and nominal pulse flow settings on different POCs is well known. In vitro bench 
measurements and in silico mathematical modeling were used to compare the 
performance of 4 POCs versus continuous flow oxygen by predicting the FIO2 at 
the trachea and entering the acini.
METHODS: Each of the 4 POCs was connected to a 3-dimensional printed replica of 
a human adult nasal airway via nasal cannula. A test lung simulated 3 breathing 
patterns representative of a patient with COPD at rest, during exercise, and 
while asleep. POCs were tested for each breathing pattern at all integer pulse 
flow settings. Volume-averaged FIO2 was calculated by analyzing oxygen 
concentrations and inhalation flow over time. In vitro oxygen waveforms were 
then combined with a single-path mathematical model of the lungs to assess 
oxygen transport through the conducting airways. In vitro experiments and 
mathematical modeling were repeated for continuous flow oxygen.
RESULTS: Continuous flow oxygen consistently delivered more (>2% absolute) 
oxygen in terms of volume-averaged FIO2 for all nominally equivalent pulse flow 
settings of >2. Differences were also observed when comparing performances 
between different POCs, particularly at high device settings (5 and 6). 
Simulations showed that efficiency of delivery to the acinar region of the lungs 
was higher in pulse flow than in continuous flow oxygen but that continuous flow 
oxygen generally delivered a higher absolute volume of oxygen. Differences in 
absolute oxygen delivery per breath between continuous flow oxygen and pulse 
flow were smaller for acinar delivery than for tracheal delivery.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant differences in POC performance based on volume-averaged 
FIO2 were found between pulse flow and continuous flow oxygen, and among pulse 
flow modes in different POCs. Although pulse flow was a more efficient mode of 
delivery than continuous flow oxygen, continuous flow oxygen delivered a greater 
absolute volume of oxygen per breath.

Copyright © 2019 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.06359
PMID: 30696754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2018 Mar;24(2):179-186. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000461.

Supplemental oxygen in patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: evidence from Nocturnal Oxygen Treatment Trial to Long-term Oxygen 
Treatment Trial.

Hatipoğlu U(1)(2), Stoller JK(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation.
(2)Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve 
University.
(3)Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine.
(4)Education Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Oxygen therapy was the first treatment shown to prolong life 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and has been 
joined by lung volume reduction surgery in selected patients with emphysema, 
smoking cessation, and potentially noninvasive ventilation in chronic 
hypercapneic respiratory failure. Although there is consensus around the 
survival-enhancing effect of supplemental oxygen (SupplO2) for patients with 
chronic severe hypoxemia at rest, the impact of SupplO2 for COPD patients with 
moderate hypoxemia and exertional desaturation had been less clear.
RECENT FINDINGS: The recently published Long-term Oxygen Treatment Trial (LOTT) 
showed no benefit of SupplO2 for the composite outcome of survival and all-cause 
hospitalizations, or for component outcomes, severe COPD exacerbations, or 
quality of life in COPD patients with moderate resting hypoxemia or room air 
normoxemia with exercise desaturation.
SUMMARY: Results of the LOTT challenge the practice of prescribing SupplO2 for 
patients with COPD and moderate resting hypoxemia or isolated exertional 
desaturation. In the context that LOTT may not have recruited patients for whom 
SupplO2 conferred subjective benefit, there may be a role for short-term trials 
of SupplO2 with assessment of subjective benefit in such patients.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000461
PMID: 29319542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Respir Med. 2019 Mar;149:52-58. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.02.004. Epub 2019 Feb 
13.

Characteristics at the time of oxygen initiation associated with its adherence: 
Findings from the COPD Long-term Oxygen Treatment Trial.

Moy ML(1), Harrington KF(2), Sternberg AL(3), Krishnan JA(4), Albert RK(5), Au 
DH(6), Casaburi R(7), Criner GJ(8), Diaz P(9), Kanner RE(10), Panos RJ(11), 
Stibolt T(12), Stoller JK(13), Tonascia J(14), Yusen RD(15), Tan AM(16), 
Fuhlbrigge AL(5); LOTT Research Group.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Section, VA Boston Healthcare System and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: marilyn.moy@va.gov.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, School of 
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System and University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Rehabilitation Clinical Trials Center, Los Angeles Biomedical Research 
Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA, USA.
(8)Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine Division, Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(10)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(11)Cincinnati Veterans Affairs Medical Center and University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(12)Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research, Portland, OR, USA.
(13)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(14)Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(15)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(16)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, Department of 
Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

RATIONALE: Characteristics associated with adherence to long-term oxygen therapy 
(LTOT) in COPD remain unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To identify patient characteristics at the time of oxygen initiation 
associated with its adherence.
METHODS: We conducted a secondary analysis of data from 359 COPD participants 
assigned to oxygen in the Long-term Oxygen Treatment Trial. Participants were 
prescribed continuous (n = 214) or intermittent (n = 145) oxygen based on 
desaturation patterns at study entry. At the time of initial prescription, 
participants rated their perceived readiness, confidence, and importance to use 
oxygen on a 0-10 scale (0 = not at all, 10 = very much). During follow-up, they 
self-reported average hours per day of use (adherence). Adherence was averaged 
over short-term (0-30 days), medium-term (months 9-12), and long-term (month 13 
to last follow-up) intervals. Multivariable logistic regression models explored 
characteristics associated with high adherence (≥16 h/day [continuous] or 
≥8 h/day [intermittent]) during each time interval.
RESULTS: Participant readiness, confidence, and importance at the time of oxygen 
initiation were associated with high short- and medium-term adherence. For each 
unit increase in baseline readiness, the odds of high short-term adherence 
increased by 21% (odds ratio [OR] 1.21, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.05-1.40) 
and 94% (OR 1.94, 95% CI 1.45-2.59) in the continuous and intermittent groups, 
respectively. In both groups, high adherence in the medium-term was associated 
with high adherence in the long-term (continuous, OR 12.49, 95% CI 4.90-31.79; 
intermittent, OR 38.08, 95% CI 6.96-208.20).
CONCLUSIONS: Readiness, confidence, and importance to use LTOT at initiation, 
and early high adherence, are significantly associated with long-term oxygen 
adherence.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.02.004
PMCID: PMC6424633
PMID: 30803886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Summary conflict of interest statement: Drs Moy, 
Albert, Diaz, Kanner, Krishnan, Panos, Stibolt, and Yusen have nothing to 
disclose. Dr. Stoller has no conflicts relevant to this work.


91. Respirology. 2008 Nov;13(7):1039-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01392.x. Epub 
2008 Aug 26.

Acute oxygen therapy does not improve cognitive and driving performance in 
hypoxaemic COPD.

Pretto JJ(1), McDonald CF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Institute for Breathing and 
Sleep, Austin Hospital, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Cognitive and neuropsychological function may be 
adversely affected by low blood oxygen levels and this has been previously 
demonstrated in hypoxaemic COPD. The aim of this study was to assess whether 
supplemental oxygen therapy while driving a motor vehicle is justified in 
hypoxaemic COPD. We therefore used computer-based driving simulation to 
investigate whether acute intranasal oxygen therapy improves the cognitive and 
driving performance of such patients.
METHODS: Thirty hypoxaemic COPD subjects with a current driving licence 
performed a 20-min computer-based driving simulation task and a 10-min 
psychomotor vigilance task (PVT) at baseline, and while breathing intranasal 
oxygen or intranasal air in a randomized, double-blind, cross-over protocol.
RESULTS: The mean (SD) age of the subjects was 72 years (8) and their mean 
driving experience was 50 years (10). Mean FEV(1) was 41% (18) of predicted and 
PaO(2) was 50.5 mm Hg (4.7) on air and 70.7 mm Hg (9.1) on oxygen. There were no 
statistically significant differences in any measure of driving performance or 
in reaction time measurements while breathing oxygen compared with air.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute oxygen therapy does not improve simulated driving performance 
or neurocognitive function as assessed by PVT in patients with hypoxaemic COPD. 
These data do not support the recommendation that oxygen should be used by this 
patient group while driving.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01392.x
PMID: 18764913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. West Afr J Med. 2019 May-Aug;36(2):122-128.

Acute Oxygen Therapy on Hospital Wards in Low Middle-Income Country: Experience 
from a Referral Centre in Ilorin, Nigeria.

Desalu OO(1), Oyedepo OO, Ojuawo OB, Ibraheem M, Aladesanmi AO, Suleiman ZA, 
Opeyemi CM, Adesina KT, Sanya EO, Salami AK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Ilorin Teaching Hospital, PMB 1459, 
Ilorin,Nigeria.

BACKGROUND: Oxygen is like any other medication that can cause severe 
consequences if administered inappropriately.
OBJECTIVE: To audit the pattern of acute oxygen therapy on regular hospital 
wards of a referral centre in Ilorin, Nigeria.
METHODS: We reviewed 150 patients that received or had a prescription for acute 
oxygen therapy in three months and extracted relevant information using a 
proforma.
RESULTS: About one-third of the patients (30%) were >65 years of age and the 
male to female ratio was 1:1. The commonest indication and medical condition for 
acute oxygen administration were hypoxemia (70.7%) and pneumonia (26.0%), 
respectively. Pneumonia accounted for most (41.2 %) of the oxygen therapy in 
childhood. The majority of patients (88.0%) had written order for oxygen 
prescription, 40.7% had a prescription to target oxygen saturation and only 
31.3% achieved their target saturation. Oxygen prescription was adequate 
(documentation of delivery device, flow rate of oxygen, and target oxygen 
saturations) in 40.7% of patients. The assessment, monitoring and titration of 
oxygen therapy were adequate in 92.7%, 65.3% and 28 % of patients respectively. 
Overall mortality was 27.3% in patients receiving acute oxygen supplementation. 
Eleven patients had unstable COPD, and 63.6 %, 54.5 % and 45.6 % of them had 
adequate oxygen prescription, monitoring and titration respectively. The 
challenges to oxygen use were faulty delivery devices, emptied oxygen cylinders, 
inability to routinely do arterial blood gas analysis and lack of hospital 
oxygen protocol.
CONCLUSION: The current practice of acute oxygen therapy is not satisfactory and 
interventions are advocated to improve the healthcare providers' administration 
of oxygen.

PMID: 31385597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Respir Med. 2007 Apr;101(4):746-53. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2006.08.013. Epub 2006 
Sep 26.

The effect of bronchodilators and oxygen alone and in combination on self-paced 
exercise performance in stable COPD.

Cukier A(1), Ferreira CA, Stelmach R, Ribeiro M, Cortopassi F, Calverley PM.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Division, Heart Institute (InCor), University of Sao Paulo Medical 
School, Sao Paulo, Brazil. pnealberto@incor.usp.br

Both oxygen therapy and bronchodilators reduce exertional breathlessness and 
improve exercise tolerance in patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). However their relative effectiveness and the value of their 
combined use on exercise performance has not been assessed. The effects of 5 mg 
of salbutamol plus 500 microg ipratropium bromide nebulisation followed by a 
6-min walking test while breathing O(2) were studied in a randomised, 
single-blind, placebo controlled, crossover trial in 28 patients with severe or 
very severe COPD, breathless on exertion and with oxygen saturation < or = 89% 
at rest or on exercise. Bronchodilator reversibility was minimal. The 6-min 
walking distance increased from 356 (128)m to 377 (117)m after the 
bronchodilator (P<0.05), to 406 (109)m after supplementary oxygen but without 
bronchodilators (P 0.011 versus bronchodilators/air and 0.001 versus 
placebo/air), and to 430 (109)m after the combination of oxygen and the 
bronchodilators (P<0.0001 versus placebo/air and bronchodilators/air; P=0.014 
versus placebo/oxygen). End-exercise dyspnea only fell significantly when oxygen 
and bronchodilator were combined. In severe or very severe COPD patients with 
relatively fixed airway obstruction bronchodilators enhance exercise performance 
obtained with oxygen. Clinically relevant improvement is possible when therapies 
with a different mechanism of action are combined.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2006.08.013
PMID: 17000096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Respir Care. 2016 Nov;61(11):1456-1464. doi: 10.4187/respcare.04406. Epub 2016 
Oct 18.

Automatic Oxygen Titration During Walking in Subjects With COPD: A Randomized 
Crossover Controlled Study.

Lellouche F(1), L'Her E(2)(3), Bouchard PA(2), Brouillard C(2), Maltais F(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche de l'Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de 
Pneumologie de Québec, Université Laval, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada. 
francois.lellouche@criucpq.ulaval.ca.
(2)Centre de Recherche de l'Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de 
Pneumologie de Québec, Université Laval, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Université Laval-Hôtel-Dieu de Lévis, Lévis, Québec, Canada and the Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire de Brest, Brest, France.

BACKGROUND: Arterial oxygen desaturation frequently occurs in patients with COPD 
during daily activities at home. Oxygen flow is usually set at fixed and low 
rates for ambulatory patients. We evaluated an innovative closed-loop system 
(FreeO2) that automatically adjusts the oxygen flow to the patient's needs in 
subjects with COPD during walking followed by recovery time, such as during 
ambulatory conditions.
METHODS: Patients with COPD who exhibited oxygen desaturation on exertion were 
included in the study. Subjects performed endurance shuttle walk tests followed 
by 10 min of recovery. The tests were conducted in a random order and in 
crossover with the 3 following conditions: subjects breathing (1) air at 2 
L/min, (2) oxygen at 2 L/min, or (3) FreeO2 (variable oxygen flow). SpO2, pulse 
rate, PETCO2 , breathing frequency, and oxygen flow were continuously recorded 
during the 3 conditions. The primary outcome was the percentage of time within 
the SpO2 target of 92-96%. Secondary outcomes included the endurance shuttle 
walk test time and distance.
RESULTS: Sixteen subjects with COPD were recruited. The percentage of time with 
SpO2 in the target range (92-96%) was higher while using the FreeO2, and time 
with severe oxygen desaturation (SpO2 <88%) was lower with FreeO2 in comparison 
with constant-flow oxygen and air testing conditions (0.6% vs 23.9% vs 52.2%, P 
< .001). In comparison with air, walking distance was increased by 35% with 
oxygen (P = .045) and by 63% with FreeO2 (P < .001). The walking distance was 
increased by 17% with FreeO2 in comparison with constant oxygen, but the 
difference was not statistically significant (P = .22).
CONCLUSIONS: Automatic titration of oxygen flow during walking to maintain 
oxygen saturation in a specified range improves oxygenation and may improve 
exercise tolerance during daily activity, such as walking, in patients with COPD 
in comparison with room air and fixed oxygen administration. (ClinicalTrials.gov 
registration: NCT02150434.).

Copyright © 2016 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.04406
PMID: 27794080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Pneumologie. 2008 Jan;62(1):11-6. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-980129. Epub 2007 Nov 15.

[Influence of nocturnal oxygen therapy on quality of life in patients with COPD 
and isolated sleep-related hypoxemia: a prospective, placebo-controlled 
cross-over trial].

[Article in German]

Orth M(1), Walther JW, Yalzin S, Bauer TT, de Zeeuw J, Kotterba S, Baberg HT, 
Schultze-Werninghaus G, Rasche K, Duchna HW.

Author information:
(1)Berufsgenossenschaftliches Universitätsklinikum Bergmannsheil GmbH, 
Medizinische Klinik III, Pneumologie, Allergologie, Schlaf- und 
Beatmungsmedizin, Bochum. maritta.orth@rub.de

BACKGROUND: In patients with COPD and isolated night time hypoxemia, oxygen 
administration has not shown any effects on life expectancy and the development 
of pulmonal arterial hypertension. The aim of the present pilot study was to 
investigate the influence of nocturnal oxygen therapy on the quality of life in 
daytime normoxemic COPD patients with nocturnal oxygen desaturations.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 19 patients with COPD, in a stable phase of the disease 
without need for oxygen supplementation under rest (PaO2 62.7 +/- 4.9 mmHg) and 
nocturnal hypoxemia (t90 = 55.5 +/- 33.4 % of registration time, mean SaO2 89.8 
+/- 1.9 %, minimal SaO2 81.1 +/- 4.8 %) were randomly assigned to either oxygen 
or placebo treatment, both generated by identical concentrator devices. Each 
treatment period lasted 6 weeks, after six weeks a cross-over was performed by a 
technician. Quality of life was assessed before and at the end of each treatment 
period by the SF-36, Nottingham Health Profile and Saint George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire.
RESULTS: Significant differences for the comparison of placebo and verum were 
only seen for the dimension sleep (NHP), all other dimensions showed no 
differences between placebo and oxygen. However, both placebo and oxygen 
improved the majority of the quality of life items significantly.
CONCLUSIONS: The prescription of supplemental oxygen in COPD patients with 
isolated nocturnal hypoxemia in the present pilot study is not able to improve 
the quality of life within 6 weeks after initiation of therapy. It cannot, 
therefore, be generally recommended, but may be indicated in patients with a 
documented improvement of sleep quality.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-980129
PMID: 18004709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Clin Respir J. 2019 Feb;13(2):120-124. doi: 10.1111/crj.12992.

The effect of isolated nocturnal oxygen desaturations on serum hs-CRP and IL-6 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Macrea MM(1), Owens RL(2), Martin T(1), Smith D(3), Oursler KK(4), Malhotra 
A(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Salem Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Salem, Virginia.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, California.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Virginia Tech Carilion School of 
Medicine, Roanoke, Virginia.
(4)Division of Geriatrics, Salem Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salem, 
Virginia.

INTRODUCTION: A majority of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) die of cardiovascular disease (CVD), yet the mechanisms responsible for 
this association are not fully understood. It remains unknown if isolated 
nocturnal oxygen desaturation (iNOD) could be one of the potential pathways by 
which the 'inflammatory COPD' phenotype leads to CVD.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to evaluate if COPD patients who meet the Medicare 
guidelines for nocturnal oxygen therapy (iNOT+) had higher serum hs-CRP and IL-6 
than those who did not meet the guidelines for iNOT (iNOT-).
METHODS: Patients with moderate to severe COPD (ie FEV1 < 80% and 
FEV1/FVC < 70), who were not on oxygen, underwent nocturnal oximetry on room 
air. Serum IL-6 and hs-CRP were collected the morning after the nocturnal 
oximetry testing.
RESULTS: A total of 28 patients were included in the study, 8 of whom had more 
than 5 minutes and 5% of their sleep time spent at oxygen saturation less than 
88% and constituted the iNOT+ group. Only serum hs-CRP was significantly higher 
in iNOT+ than iNOT- (P = 0.050). There was no difference in the rate of COPD 
exacerbations at one and three months, or five-year survival between the groups 
(P > 0.3).
CONCLUSION: COPD patients who have more than 5 minutes and 5% of their sleep 
time spent at oxygen saturation less than 88% have increased hs-CRP, which is 
associated with increased risk of future CVD.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.12992
PMCID: PMC6585441
PMID: 30638307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST All authors have stated 
explicitly that there are no conflicts of interest in connection with this 
article.


97. Respir Med. 2011 Mar;105(3):494-505. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2010.08.008. Epub 2010 
Sep 18.

Contrasting pressure-support ventilation and helium-oxygen during exercise in 
severe COPD.

Hussain O(1), Collins EG, Adiguzel N, Langbein WE, Tobin MJ, Laghi F.

Author information:
(1)Edward Hines, Jr Veterans Affairs Hospital, 111N, 5th Avenue and Roosevelt 
Road, Hines, IL 60141, USA.

Helium-oxygen mixtures and pressure-support ventilation have been used to unload 
the respiratory muscles and increase exercise tolerance in COPD. Considering the 
different characteristics of these techniques, we hypothesized that 
helium-oxygen would be more effective in reducing exercise-induced dynamic 
hyperinflation than pressure-support. We also hypothesized that patients would 
experience greater increases in respiratory rate and minute ventilation with 
helium-oxygen than with pressure-support. The hypotheses were tested in ten 
patients with severe COPD (FEV(1) = 28 ± 3% predicted [mean ± SE]) during 
constant-load cycling (80% maximal workrate) while breathing 30% oxygen-alone, 
helium-oxygen, and pressure-support in randomized order. As hypothesized, 
helium-oxygen had greater impact on dynamic hyperinflation than did 
pressure-support (end-exercise; p = 0.03). For the most part of exercise, 
respiratory rate and minute ventilation were greater with helium-oxygen than 
with pressure-support (p ≤ 0.008). During the initial phases of exercise, 
helium-oxygen caused less rib-cage muscle recruitment than did pressure-support 
(p < 0.03), and after the start of exercise it caused greater reduction in 
inspiratory reserve volume (p ≤ 0.02). Despite these different responses, 
helium-oxygen and pressure-support caused similar increases in exercise duration 
(oxygen-alone: 6.9 ± 0.8 min; helium-oxygen: 10.7 ± 1.4 min; pressure-support: 
11.2 ± 1.6 min; p = 0.003) and similar decreases in inspiratory effort 
(esophageal pressure-time product), respiratory drive, pulmonary resistance, 
dyspnea and leg effort (p < 0.03). In conclusion, helium-oxygen reduced 
exercise-induced dynamic hyperinflation by improving the relationship between 
hyperinflation and minute ventilation. In contrast, pressure-support reduced 
hyperinflation solely as a result of lowering ventilation. Helium-oxygen was 
more effective in reducing exercise-induced dynamic hyperinflation in severe 
COPD, and was associated with greater increases in respiratory rate and minute 
ventilation than pressure-support.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2010.08.008
PMID: 20851591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Eur Respir J. 2003 Oct;22(4):584-8. doi: 10.1183/09031936.03.00027603a.

Short-burst oxygen immediately before and after exercise is ineffective in 
nonhypoxic COPD patients.

Lewis CA(1), Eaton TE, Young P, Kolbe J.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Services, Green Lane Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand. 
clewis@adhb.govt.nz

Short-burst oxygen therapy (SBOT) remains an unproven treatment for reduction of 
exertional dyspnoea in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study 
aimed to assess whether SBOT before exercise reduces dyspnoea or improves 
performance, and whether SBOT after exercise reduces dyspnoea during recovery. 
Twenty-two clinically stable COPD patients (mean forced expiratory volume in one 
second 34% predicted, mean resting saturation 94%) attended a respiratory 
gymnasium and undertook four 6-min walk (6MW) tests at each of two sessions, 1 
week apart. Cylinder air or oxygen was administered single-blind in random order 
for 5 min prior to the first two 6MW and during recovery following the final two 
6MW. Dyspnoea was self-rated by subjects using the modified Borg scale. There 
was no significant difference in mean 6MW distance or final Borg score for air 
and oxygen given before exercise. There was also no significant difference in 
mean time-to-resting Borg score for air and oxygen given after exercise. Only 
two subjects demonstrated a clinically significant and consistent reduction in 
dyspnoea for oxygen compared with air either before or after exercise. Overall, 
short-burst oxygen therapy neither reduced dyspnoea nor improved performance. 
This study does not support the use of short-burst oxygen therapy either 
immediately before or after exercise.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.03.00027603a
PMID: 14582907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Med J Aust. 2005 Jun 20;182(12):621-6.

Adult domiciliary oxygen therapy. Position statement of the Thoracic Society of 
Australia and New Zealand.

McDonald CF(1), Crockett AJ, Young IH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Austin Hospital, Burgundy 
Street, Heidelberg, VIC 3084, Australia. christine.mcdonald@austin.org.au

Erratum in
    Med J Aust. 2005 Aug 1;183(3):143.

Comment in
    Med J Aust. 2005 Nov 7;183(9):472-3.
    Med J Aust. 2005 Nov 7;183(9):496.

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and a stable daytime PaO2 of 
< or = 55 mmHg (7.3 kPa) live longer and have a better quality of life if 
provided with long-term continuous oxygen therapy. It is reasonable to offer 
continuous oxygen therapy also to patients with other lung diseases that cause 
chronic hypoxaemia. Indications for supplemental oxygen therapy during exercise 
(ambulatory oxygen therapy) and sleep (nocturnal oxygen therapy) are less clear.

PMID: 15963018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Crit Care. 2012 Oct 29;16(5):323. doi: 10.1186/cc11475.

Oxygen-induced hypercapnia in COPD: myths and facts.

Abdo WF, Heunks LM.

During our medical training, we learned that oxygen administration in patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) induces hypercapnia through 
the 'hypoxic drive' mechanism and can be dangerous. This mindset frequently 
results in the reluctance of clinicians to administer oxygen to hypoxemic 
patients with COPD. However, this fear is not based on evidence in the 
literature. Here, we will review the impact and pathophysiology of 
oxygen-induced hypercapnia in patients with acute exacerbation of COPD and 
recommend a titrated oxygen management.

DOI: 10.1186/cc11475
PMCID: PMC3682248
PMID: 23106947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]