1. Lancet. 2017 May 13;389(10082):1919-1929. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30188-5. 
Epub 2017 Apr 3.

Single inhaler extrafine triple therapy versus long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (TRINITY): a double-blind, 
parallel group, randomised controlled trial.

Vestbo J(1), Papi A(2), Corradi M(3), Blazhko V(4), Montagna I(5), Francisco 
C(6), Cohuet G(6), Vezzoli S(5), Scuri M(5), Singh D(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK; University Hospital South Manchester NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, UK; Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester, UK. Electronic 
address: jorgen.vestbo@manchester.ac.uk.
(2)Research Centre on Asthma and COPD, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, 
Italy.
(4)Pulmonology Department No 2, Kharkiv City Clinical Hospital No 13, Kharkiv, 
Ukraine.
(5)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.
(6)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi SAS, Courbevoie, France.
(7)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK; University Hospital South Manchester NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, UK; Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2017 May 13;389(10082):1864-1865.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2017 Jul;5(7):e25.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2017 Jul;5(7):e26.

BACKGROUND: Limited data are available for the efficacy of triple therapy with 
two long-acting bronchodilators and an inhaled corticosteroid in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We compared treatment with extrafine 
beclometasone dipropionate, formoterol fumarate, and glycopyrronium bromide 
(BDP/FF/GB; fixed triple) with tiotropium, and BDP/FF plus tiotropium (open 
triple).
METHODS: For this double-blind, parallel-group, randomised, controlled trial, 
eligible patients had COPD, post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s 
(FEV1) of less than 50%, at least one moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbation in 
the previous 12 months, and a COPD Assessment Test total score of at least 10. 
After a 2-week run-in period receiving one inhalation per day via single-dose 
dry-powder inhaler of open-label 18 μg tiotropium, patients were randomised 
(2:2:1) using a interactive response technology system to 52 weeks treatment 
with tiotropium, fixed triple, or open triple. Randomisation was stratified by 
country and severity of airflow limitation. The primary endpoint was 
moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbation rate. The key secondary endpoint was change 
from baseline in pre-dose FEV1 at week 52. The trial is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01911364.
FINDINGS: Between Jan 21, 2014, and March 18, 2016, 2691 patients received fixed 
triple (n=1078), tiotropium (n=1075), or open triple (n=538). Moderate-to-severe 
exacerbation rates were 0·46 (95% CI 0·41-0·51) for fixed triple, 0·57 
(0·52-0·63) for tiotropium, and 0·45 (0·39-0·52) for open triple; fixed triple 
was superior to tiotropium (rate ratio 0·80 [95% CI 0·69-0·92]; p=0·0025). For 
week 52 pre-dose FEV1, fixed triple was superior to tiotropium (mean difference 
0·061 L [0·037 to 0·086]; p<0·0001) and non-inferior to open triple (-0·003L 
[-0·033 to 0·027]; p=0·85). Adverse events were reported by 594 (55%) patients 
with fixed triple, 622 (58%) with tiotropium, and 309 (58%) with open triple.
INTERPRETATION: In our TRINITY study, treatment with extrafine fixed triple 
therapy had clinical benefits compared with tiotropium in patients with 
symptomatic COPD, FEV1 of less than 50%, and a history of exacerbations.
FUNDING: Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30188-5
PMID: 28385353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Feb 10;2(2):CD012066. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD012066.pub2.

Long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) plus long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) 
versus LABA plus inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) for stable chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).

Horita N(1), Goto A(2), Shibata Y(1), Ota E(3), Nakashima K(1), Nagai K(1), 
Kaneko T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Yokohama City University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Fukuura 3-9, Kanazawa, Yokohama, Japan, 236-0004.
(2)Metabolic Epidemiology Section, Division of Epidemiology, Center for Public 
Health Sciences, National Cancer Center, Tokyo, Japan, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan, 104-0045.
(3)Global Health Nursing, St. Luke's International University, Graduate School 
of Nursing Sciences, 10-1 Akashi-cho, Chuo-Ku, Tokyo, Japan, 104-0044.

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2017 Oct;22(5):183-184.

BACKGROUND: Three classes of inhaler medications are used to manage chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): long-acting beta-agonists (LABA), 
long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA), and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). 
When two classes of medications are required, LAMA plus LABA (LAMA+LABA) and 
LABA plus ICS (LABA+ICS) are often selected because these combinations can be 
administered via a single medication device. The previous Global Initiative for 
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) guidance recommended LABA+ICS as the 
first-line treatment for managing stable COPD in high-risk people of categories 
C and D. However, the updated GOLD 2017 guidance recommends LAMA+LABA over 
LABA+ICS.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the benefits and harms of LAMA+LABA versus LABA+ICS for 
treatment of people with stable COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We performed an electronic search of the Cochrane Airways Group 
Specialised Register (2 February 2016), ClinicalTrials.gov (4 June 2016), and 
the World Health Organization Clinical Trials Search Portal (4 June 2016), 
followed by a handsearch (5 June 2016). Two review authors screened and 
scrutinised the selected articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included individual randomised controlled trials, 
parallel-group trials, and cross-over trials comparing LAMA+LABA and LABA+ICS 
for stable COPD. The minimum accepted trial duration was one month and trials 
should have been conducted in an outpatient setting.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted data 
and evaluated risk of bias. We resolved any discrepancies through discussion. We 
analysed dichotomous data as odds ratios (OR), and continuous data as mean 
differences (MD), with 95% confidence interval (CI) using Review Manager 5. 
Exacerbations were measured by counting the number of people experiencing one or 
more exacerbation.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 11 studies comprising 9839 participants in our 
quantitative analysis. Most studies included people with moderate to severe 
COPD, without recent exacerbations. One pharmaceutical sponsored trial that 
included only people with recent exacerbations was the largest study and 
accounted for 37% of participants. All but one study were sponsored by 
pharmaceutical companies, thus we rated them as having a high risk of 'other 
bias'. The unsponsored study was at high risk of performance and detection bias, 
and possible selective reporting.Five studies recruited GOLD Category B 
participants, one study recruited Category D participants, two studies recruited 
Category A/B participants, and three studies recruited participants regardless 
of category. Follow-up ranged from 6 to 52 weeks.Compared to the LABA+ICS arm, 
the results for the pooled primary outcomes for the LAMA+LABA arm were as 
follows: exacerbations, OR 0.82 (95% CI 0.70 to 0.96, P = 0.01, I2 = 17%, low 
quality evidence); serious adverse events (SAE), OR 0.91 (95% CI 0.79 to 1.05, P 
= 0.18, I2 = 0, moderate quality evidence); St. George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score change from the baseline, MD -1.22 (95% CI 
-2.52 to 0.07, P = 0.06, I2 = 71%, low quality evidence); and trough forced 
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) change from the baseline, MD 0.08 L (95% 
CI 0.06 to 0.09, P < 0.0001, I2 = 50%, moderate quality evidence). Compared to 
the LABA+ICS arm, the results for the pooled secondary outcomes for the 
LAMA+LABA arm were as follows: pneumonia, OR 0.57 (95% CI 0.42 to 0.79, P = 
0.0006, I2 = 0%, low quality evidence); all-cause death, OR 1.01 (95% CI 0.61 to 
1.67, P = 0.88, I2 = 0%, low quality evidence); and SGRQ total score change from 
the baseline of 4 points or greater (the minimal clinically important difference 
for the SGRQ is 4 points), OR 1.25 (95% CI 1.09 to 1.44, P = 0.002, I2 = 0%, 
moderate quality evidence).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: For the treatment of COPD, LAMA+LABA has fewer 
exacerbations, a larger improvement of FEV1, a lower risk of pneumonia, and more 
frequent improvement in quality of life as measured by an increase over 4 units 
or more of the SGRQ. These data were supported by low or moderate quality 
evidence generated from mainly participants with moderate to severe COPD in 
heterogeneous trials with an observation period of less than one year. Our 
findings support the recently updated GOLD guidance.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012066.pub2
PMCID: PMC6464543
PMID: 28185242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TK: received grants or lecture fees (or both) 
from GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer, Meiji, AstraZeneca, and 
Novartis from 2013 to 2016. This review was not funded by any pharmaceutical 
companies. HN, GA, SY, OE, NK, and NK: none known.


3. N Engl J Med. 2018 May 3;378(18):1671-1680. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1713901. Epub 
2018 Apr 18.

Once-Daily Single-Inhaler Triple versus Dual Therapy in Patients with COPD.

Lipson DA(1), Barnhart F(1), Brealey N(1), Brooks J(1), Criner GJ(1), Day NC(1), 
Dransfield MT(1), Halpin DMG(1), Han MK(1), Jones CE(1), Kilbride S(1), Lange 
P(1), Lomas DA(1), Martinez FJ(1), Singh D(1), Tabberer M(1), Wise RA(1), Pascoe 
SJ(1); IMPACT Investigators.

Author information:
(1)From GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville (D.A. Lipson, J.B., S.J.P.), and the 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania (D.A. Lipson), and Lewis 
Katz School of Medicine at Temple University (G.J.C.), Philadelphia - all in 
Pennsylvania; GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC (F.B., C.E.J.); 
GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park West, Uxbridge (N.B., N.C.D., S.K., M.T.), the 
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter 
(D.M.G.H.), UCL Respiratory, University College London, London (D.A. Lomas), and 
the Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Institute of Inflammation and 
Repair, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, 
Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester (D.S.) - all in the 
United Kingdom; the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, 
Lung Health Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham (M.T.D.); 
the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor (M.K.H.); the Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen (P.L.), and the Medical Department, Pulmonary Section, 
Herlev-Gentofte Hospital, Herlev (P.L.) - both in Denmark; New York-Presbyterian 
Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York (F.J.M.); and the Division of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore (R.A.W.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2018 May 3;378(18):1723-1724.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Aug 09;379(6):590-1.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Aug 09;379(6):591.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Aug 09;379(6):591-2.
    Ann Intern Med. 2018 Aug 21;169(4):JC16.
    MMW Fortschr Med. 2018 Oct;160(17):34.
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2018 Nov;143(23):1668.

BACKGROUND: The benefits of triple therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) with an inhaled glucocorticoid, a long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA), and a long-acting β2-agonist (LABA), as compared with dual 
therapy (either inhaled glucocorticoid-LABA or LAMA-LABA), are uncertain.
METHODS: In this randomized trial involving 10,355 patients with COPD, we 
compared 52 weeks of a once-daily combination of fluticasone furoate (an inhaled 
glucocorticoid) at a dose of 100 μg, umeclidinium (a LAMA) at a dose of 62.5 μg, 
and vilanterol (a LABA) at a dose of 25 μg (triple therapy) with fluticasone 
furoate-vilanterol (at doses of 100 μg and 25 μg, respectively) and 
umeclidinium-vilanterol (at doses of 62.5 μg and 25 μg, respectively). Each 
regimen was administered in a single Ellipta inhaler. The primary outcome was 
the annual rate of moderate or severe COPD exacerbations during treatment.
RESULTS: The rate of moderate or severe exacerbations in the triple-therapy 
group was 0.91 per year, as compared with 1.07 per year in the fluticasone 
furoate-vilanterol group (rate ratio with triple therapy, 0.85; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.80 to 0.90; 15% difference; P<0.001) and 1.21 per year in the 
umeclidinium-vilanterol group (rate ratio with triple therapy, 0.75; 95% CI, 
0.70 to 0.81; 25% difference; P<0.001). The annual rate of severe exacerbations 
resulting in hospitalization in the triple-therapy group was 0.13, as compared 
with 0.19 in the umeclidinium-vilanterol group (rate ratio, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.56 
to 0.78; 34% difference; P<0.001). There was a higher incidence of pneumonia in 
the inhaled-glucocorticoid groups than in the umeclidinium-vilanterol group, and 
the risk of clinician-diagnosed pneumonia was significantly higher with triple 
therapy than with umeclidinium-vilanterol, as assessed in a time-to-first-event 
analysis (hazard ratio, 1.53; 95% CI, 1.22 to 1.92; P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Triple therapy with fluticasone furoate, umeclidinium, and 
vilanterol resulted in a lower rate of moderate or severe COPD exacerbations 
than fluticasone furoate-vilanterol or umeclidinium-vilanterol in this 
population. Triple therapy also resulted in a lower rate of hospitalization due 
to COPD than umeclidinium-vilanterol. (Funded by GlaxoSmithKline; IMPACT 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02164513 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1713901
PMID: 29668352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2018 Feb;48:71-79. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.10.003. Epub 
2017 Oct 4.

Pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics and safety of revefenacin (TD-4208), a 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist, in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD): Results of two randomized, double-blind, phase 2 
studies.

Quinn D(1), Barnes CN(2), Yates W(3), Bourdet DL(4), Moran EJ(5), Potgieter 
P(6), Nicholls A(7), Haumann B(8), Singh D(9).

Author information:
(1)P3 Research, 121 Adelaide Road, Mount Cook, Wellington, New Zealand. 
Electronic address: dean@p3research.co.nz.
(2)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States. 
Electronic address: cbarnes@theravance.com.
(3)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States. 
Electronic address: wyates@theravance.com.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States. 
Electronic address: dbourdet@theravance.com.
(5)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States. 
Electronic address: emoran@theravance.com.
(6)Theravance Biopharma UK, Limited, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
peterpotgieter2@aol.com.
(7)Pharmaceutical Consulting, Burlingame, CA, United States. Electronic address: 
andrew.10.nicholls@gmail.com.
(8)Theravance Biopharma UK, Limited, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
bhaumann@theravance.com.
(9)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of 
South Manchester, NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: dsingh@meu.org.uk.

BACKGROUND: Revefenacin (TD-4208) is a potent, lung-selective, long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist currently in development as a once-daily nebulized therapy 
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We evaluated the 
pharmacodynamics (bronchodilator activity), pharmacokinetics (PK) and safety of 
single- and multiple-dose administrations of revefenacin in two clinical trials 
(Study 0059 and Study 0091) in patients with moderate to severe COPD.
METHODS: In Study 0059, 32 patients were randomized to receive a single dose of 
revefenacin (350 or 700 μg), active control ipratropium (500 μg) or placebo 
inhalation solution administered via standard jet nebulizer in a double-blind, 
crossover fashion. In Study 0091, 59 patients were randomized to receive 
once-daily inhalations of revefenacin (22, 44, 88, 175, 350 or 700 μg) or 
placebo for 7 days in a double-blind, incomplete block, five-way crossover 
design. The primary efficacy endpoint was change from baseline in peak (0-6 h) 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) in Study 0059, and trough FEV1 after the 
final dose (Day 7) in Study 0091. In both studies, secondary endpoints included 
area under the FEV1-time curve (FEV1 AUC) values from time 12-24 h post dose and 
FEV1 AUC values from time zero to 24 h post dose.
RESULTS: Revefenacin demonstrated a rapid onset and sustained duration of 
bronchodilator action in both studies. In Study 0059, mean peak FEV1 was 
significantly higher (p < 0.001) for revefenacin and ipratropium compared to 
placebo, with differences of 176.8 mL for 350 μg revefenacin, 162.2 mL for 
700 μg revefenacin and 190.6 mL for ipratropium. In Study 0091, mean trough FEV1 
on Day 7 was significantly higher (p < 0.006) for all revefenacin doses compared 
to placebo, with differences ranging from 53.5 mL (22 μg dose) to 114.2 mL 
(175 μg dose). The results for the other spirometry endpoints were consistent 
with the primary endpoint for each study, demonstrating that the bronchodilator 
effect of revefenacin lasted more than 24 h following nebulized administration. 
Revefenacin was rapidly absorbed and extensively metabolized, followed by a slow 
apparent terminal elimination and minimal accumulation with repeated dosing. In 
both studies, adverse events were generally mild and occurred with similar 
frequencies in all groups, with no indication of significant systemic 
anti-muscarinic activity at any dose.
CONCLUSIONS: Following single or multiple nebulized-dose administration in 
patients with COPD, revefenacin demonstrates a rapid onset and sustained 
duration of bronchodilator effect over 24 h following once-daily administration, 
with a PK profile that is commensurate with low systemic exposure.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.10.003
PMID: 28987804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. JAMA. 2017 Jul 18;318(3):279-290. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.8372.

Diagnosis and Management of Asthma in Adults: A Review.

McCracken JL(1), Veeranki SP(2), Ameredes BT(3), Calhoun WJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine and Community Health, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Critical Care and Sleep, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston.

Erratum in
    JAMA. 2017 Oct 24;318(16):1615. Dosage error in article text.

IMPORTANCE: Asthma affects about 7.5% of the adult population. Evidence-based 
diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment can improve functioning and quality of life 
in adult patients with asthma.
OBSERVATIONS: Asthma is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome primarily affecting 
the lower respiratory tract, characterized by episodic or persistent symptoms of 
wheezing, dyspnea, and cough. The diagnosis of asthma requires these symptoms 
and demonstration of reversible airway obstruction using spirometry. Identifying 
clinically important allergen sensitivities is useful. Inhaled short-acting 
β2-agonists provide rapid relief of acute symptoms, but maintenance with daily 
inhaled corticosteroids is the standard of care for persistent asthma. 
Combination therapy, including inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting 
β2-agonists, is effective in patients for whom inhaled corticosteroids alone are 
insufficient. The use of inhaled long-acting β2-agonists alone is not 
appropriate. Other controller approaches include long-acting muscarinic 
antagonists (eg, tiotropium), and biological agents directed against proteins 
involved in the pathogenesis of asthma (eg, omalizumab, mepolizumab, 
reslizumab).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Asthma is characterized by variable airway 
obstruction, airway hyperresponsiveness, and airway inflammation. Management of 
persistent asthma requires avoidance of aggravating environmental factors, use 
of short-acting β2-agonists for rapid relief of symptoms, and daily use of 
inhaled corticosteroids. Other controller medications, such as long-acting 
bronchodilators and biologics, may be required in moderate and severe asthma. 
Patients with severe asthma generally benefit from consultation with an asthma 
specialist for consideration of additional treatment, including injectable 
biologic agents.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2017.8372
PMID: 28719697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2017;237:41-62. doi: 10.1007/164_2016_68.

Muscarinic Receptor Antagonists.

Matera MG(1), Cazzola M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Pharmacology, Second University 
of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Tor Vergata, Rome, 
Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.

Parasympathetic activity is increased in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma and appears to be the major reversible 
component of airway obstruction. Therefore, treatment with muscarinic receptor 
antagonists is an effective bronchodilator therapy in COPD and also in asthmatic 
patients. In recent years, the accumulating evidence that the cholinergic system 
controls not only contraction by airway smooth muscle but also the functions of 
inflammatory cells and airway epithelial cells has suggested that muscarinic 
receptor antagonists could exert other effects that may be of clinical relevance 
when we must treat a patient suffering from COPD or asthma. There are currently 
six muscarinic receptor antagonists licenced for use in the treatment of COPD, 
the short-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (SAMAs) ipratropium bromide and 
oxitropium bromide and the long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMAs) 
aclidinium bromide, tiotropium bromide, glycopyrronium bromide and umeclidinium 
bromide. Concerns have been raised about possible associations of muscarinic 
receptor antagonists with cardiovascular safety, but the most advanced compounds 
seem to have an improved safety profile. Further beneficial effects of SAMAs and 
LAMAs are seen when added to existing treatments, including LABAs, inhaled 
corticosteroids and phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors. The importance of tiotropium 
bromide in the maintenance treatment of COPD, and likely in asthma, has spurred 
further research to identify new LAMAs. There are a number of molecules that are 
being identified, but only few have reached the clinical development.

DOI: 10.1007/164_2016_68
PMID: 27787709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Dec 12;13:3971-3981. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S185975. eCollection 2018.

Triple therapy (ICS/LABA/LAMA) in COPD: time for a reappraisal.

Vanfleteren L(1)(2)(3), Fabbri LM(1)(4), Papi A(4), Petruzzelli S(5), Celli 
B(6).

Author information:
(1)COPD Center, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, lowie.vanfleteren@vgregion.se.
(2)CIRO, Horn, the Netherlands, lowie.vanfleteren@vgregion.se.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Hospital, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands, lowie.vanfleteren@vgregion.se.
(4)Section of Cardiorespiratory and Internal Medicine, Department of Medical 
Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(5)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Recently, two "fixed triple" single-inhaler combinations of an inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS), a long-acting β2-agonist (LABA), and a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) have become available for patients with COPD. This 
review presents the clinical evidence that led to the approval of these triple 
therapies, discusses the role of ICS in patients with COPD, and presents data on 
the relative efficacy of "fixed triple" (ICS/LAMA/LABA) therapy vs LAMA, 
ICS/LABA, and LAMA/LABA combinations, and summarizes studies in which ICS/LABAs 
were combined with LAMAs to form "open triple" combinations. Of the five main 
fixed triple studies completed so far, three evaluated the efficacy and safety 
of an extrafine formulation of beclometasone dipropionate, formoterol fumarate, 
and glycopyrronium; the other two studies evaluated fluticasone furoate, 
vilanterol, and umeclidinium. Overall, compared to LAMA, ICS/LABA, or LAMA/LABA, 
triple therapy decreased the risk of exacerbations and improved lung function 
and health status, with a favorable benefit-to-harm ratio. Furthermore, triple 
therapy showed a promising signal in terms of improved survival. The evidence 
suggests that triple therapy is the most effective treatment in moderate/severe 
symptomatic patients with COPD at risk of exacerbations, with marginal if any 
risk of side effects including pneumonia. Ongoing studies are examining the role 
of triple therapy in less severe symptomatic patients with COPD and asthma-COPD 
overlap.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S185975
PMCID: PMC6296179
PMID: 30587953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure LV reports grants and personal fees 
from AstraZeneca, grants from Philips, and Fisher and Paykel, and personal fees 
from Chiesi, GSK, Pulmonx, Menarini, and Boehringer-Ingelheim, all outside the 
submitted work. LMF reports grants, personal fees, and nonfinancial support from 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Sharp & Dohme, 
Takeda, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Menarini, Laboratori Guidotti, and Almirall, 
personal fees and nonfinancial support from Pearl Therapeutics, Mundipharma, and 
Boston Scientific, personal fees from Kyorin, Bayer, and Zambon, and grants from 
Pfizer, Dompè, Malesci, Alfasigma, and Vree Health Italia, all outside the 
submitted work. AP reports grants, personal fees, nonfinancial support, advisory 
board membership and consultancy work from Chiesi, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Mundipharma, and TEVA, personal fees and nonfinancial 
support from Menarini, Novartis, and Zambon, and grants from Sanofi, all outside 
the submitted work. SP is employed by Chiesi, the sponsor of TRILOGY, TRINITY, 
and TRIBUTE. BC reports grants to the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
from AstraZeneca, and that he is a consultant for GlaxoSmithKline, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Pulmonix, Chiesi, and Menarini, all 
outside the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


8. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Nov 16;10:2495-517. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S92412. eCollection 2015.

Comparative efficacy of long-acting muscarinic antagonist monotherapies in COPD: 
a systematic review and network meta-analysis.

Ismaila AS(1), Huisman EL(2), Punekar YS(3), Karabis A(2).

Author information:
(1)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA 
; Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, 
Canada.
(2)Real World Strategy and Analytics, Mapi Group, Houten, the Netherlands.
(3)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: Randomized, controlled trials comparing long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) efficacy in COPD are limited. This network meta-analysis (NMA) 
assessed the relative efficacy of tiotropium 18 µg once-daily (OD) and newer 
agents (aclidinium 400 µg twice-daily, glycopyrronium 50 µg OD, and umeclidinium 
62.5 µg OD).
METHODS: A systematic literature review identified randomized, controlled trials 
of adult COPD patients receiving LAMAs. A NMA within a Bayesian framework 
examined change from baseline in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
(FEV1), transitional dyspnea index focal score, St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire score, and rescue medication use.
RESULTS: Twenty-four studies (n=21,311) compared LAMAs with placebo/each other. 
Aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium, and umeclidinium, respectively, 
demonstrated favorable results versus placebo, for change from baseline (95% 
credible interval) in 12-week trough FEV1 (primary endpoint: 101.40 mL 
[77.06-125.60]; 117.20 mL [104.50-129.90]; 114.10 mL [103.10-125.20]; 136.70 mL 
[104.20-169.20]); 24-week trough FEV1 (128.10 mL [84.10-172.00]; 135.80 mL 
[123.10-148.30]; 106.40 mL [95.45-117.30]; 115.00 mL [74.51-155.30]); 24-week St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire score (-4.60 [-6.76 to -2.54]; -3.14 [-3.83 
to -2.45]; -2.43 [-2.92 to -1.93]; -4.69 [-7.05 to -2.31]); 24-week transitional 
dyspnea index score (1.00 [0.41-1.59]; 1.01 [0.79-1.22]; 0.82 [0.62-1.02]; 1.00 
[0.49-1.51]); and 24-week rescue medication use (data not available; -0.41 
puffs/day [-0.62 to -0.20]; -0.52 puffs/day [-0.74 to -0.30]; -0.30 puffs/day 
[-0.81 to 0.21]). For 12-week trough FEV1, differences in change from baseline 
(95% credible interval) were -12.8 mL (-39.39 to 13.93), aclidinium versus 
tiotropium; 3.08 mL (-7.58 to 13.69), glycopyrronium versus tiotropium; 22.58 mL 
(-11.58 to 56.97), umeclidinium versus tiotropium; 15.90 mL (-11.60 to 43.15), 
glycopyrronium versus aclidinium; 35.40 mL (-5.06 to 76.07), umeclidinium versus 
aclidinium; and 19.50 mL (-15.30 to 54.38), umeclidinium versus glycopyrronium. 
Limitations included inhaler-related factors and safety; longer-term outcomes 
were not considered.
CONCLUSION: The new LAMAs studied had at least comparable efficacy to 
tiotropium, the established class standard. Choice should depend on physician's 
and patient's preference.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S92412
PMCID: PMC4655912
PMID: 26604738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2014 Dec 12;111(50):847-55. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2014.0847.

Severe asthma: definition, diagnosis and treatment.

Lommatzsch M(1), Virchow JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pneumology/Interdisciplinary Intensive Care Unit, University of 
Rostock.

Comment in
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2015 Aug 31;112(35-36):601.
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2015 Aug 31;112(35-36):601.
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2015 Aug 31;112(35-36):601-2.

BACKGROUND: A minority of patients with asthma have uncontrolled or partially 
controlled asthma despite intensive treatment. These patients present a special 
challenge because of the extensive diagnostic evaluation that they need, 
insufficient evidence regarding personalized treatments, and their high 
consumption of health-care resources.
METHODS: The definition, diagnosis, and treatment of severe asthma are presented 
on the basis of a selective literature review and the authors' clinical 
experience.
RESULTS: Severe asthma is present, by definition, when adequate control of 
asthma cannot be achieved by high-dose treatment with inhaled cortico - steroids 
and additional controllers (long-acting inhaled beta 2 agonists, montelukast, 
and/or theophylline) or by oral corticosteroid treatment (for at least six 
months per year), or is lost when the treatment is reduced. Before any further 
treatments are evaluated, differential diagnoses of asthma should be ruled out, 
comorbidities should be treated, persistent triggers should be eliminated, and 
patient adherence should be optimized. Moreover, pulmonary rehabilitation is 
recommended in order to stabilize asthma over the long term and reduce absences 
from school or work. The additional drugs that can be used include tiotropium, 
omalizumab (for IgE-mediated asthma), and azithromycin (for non-eosinophilic 
asthma). Antibodies against interleukin-5 or its receptor will probably be 
approved soon for the treatment of severe eosinophilic asthma.
CONCLUSION: The diagnosis and treatment of severe asthma is time consuming and 
requires special experience. There is a need for competent treatment centers, 
continuing medical education, and research on the prevalence of severe asthma.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2014.0847
PMCID: PMC4357024
PMID: 25585581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Chest. 2016 May;149(5):1181-96. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.02.646. Epub 2016 Feb 
26.

A Systematic Review With Meta-Analysis of Dual Bronchodilation With LAMA/LABA 
for the Treatment of Stable COPD.

Calzetta L(1), Rogliani P(2), Matera MG(3), Cazzola M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, 
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Systems Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, 
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Chair of Respiratory Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Pharmacology, Second University 
of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Systems Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, 
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Chair of Respiratory Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. 
Electronic address: mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Apr 1;197(7):944-946.

BACKGROUND: The wide availability of long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA)/long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) in the 
absence of head-to-head comparative pragmatic trials makes it difficult to 
choose which combination should be used. Therefore, we carried out a systematic 
review with meta-analysis that incorporated the data from trials lasting at 
least 3 months to evaluate the effectiveness of LAMA/LABA FDCs for COPD 
treatment.
METHODS: Randomized controlled trials were identified by searching different 
databases of published and unpublished trials. We aimed to assess the influence 
of LAMA/LABA combinations on trough FEV1, transitional dyspnea index, St. 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire, and cardiac safety vs monocomponents.
RESULTS: Fourteen papers and one congress abstract with 23,168 patients with 
COPD (combinations, n = 10,328; monocomponents, n = 12,840) were included in 
this study. Our results showed that all LAMA/LABA combinations were always more 
effective than the LAMA or LABA alone in terms of the improvement in trough 
FEV1. Although there was not significant difference among LAMA/LABA 
combinations, we identified a gradient of effectiveness among the currently 
available LAMA/LABA FDCs. LAMA/LABA combinations also improved both transitional 
dyspnea index and St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire scores, but did not 
increase the cardiovascular risk when compared with monocomponents.
CONCLUSIONS: The gradient of effectiveness emerging from this meta-analysis is 
merely a weak indicator of possible differences between the various LAMA/LABA 
FDCs. Only direct comparisons will document if a specific LAMA/LABA FDC is 
better than the other. In the meanwhile, we believe it is only proper to 
consider that dual bronchodilation is better than a LAMA or a LABA alone, 
regardless of the drugs used.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.02.646
PMID: 26923629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. BMJ. 2018 Nov 6;363:k4388. doi: 10.1136/bmj.k4388.

Triple therapy in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zheng Y(1), Zhu J(2), Liu Y(3), Lai W(4), Lin C(4), Qiu K(2), Wu J(2), Yao W(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Physiological Sciences and Department of Pharmacy of the 
Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University, Guangdong Medical 
University, Zhanjiang, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Guangdong Medical University, Zhanjiang, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical 
University, Guangdong Medical University, No 57, South of Renmin Avenue, 
Zhanjiang 524001, China.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical 
University, Guangdong Medical University, No 57, South of Renmin Avenue, 
Zhanjiang 524001, China yaoweimin2014@yeah.net.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the rate of moderate to severe exacerbations between 
triple therapy and dual therapy or monotherapy in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed, Embase, Cochrane databases, and clinical trial registries 
searched from inception to April 2018.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials comparing triple therapy with 
dual therapy or monotherapy in patients with COPD were eligible. Efficacy and 
safety outcomes of interest were also available.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Data were collected independently. Meta-analyses 
were conducted to calculate rate ratios, hazard ratios, risk ratios, and mean 
differences with 95% confidence intervals. Quality of evidence was summarised in 
accordance with GRADE methodology (grading of recommendations assessment, 
development, and evaluation).
RESULTS: 21 trials (19 publications) were included. Triple therapy consisted of 
a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), long acting β agonist (LABA), and 
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS). Triple therapy was associated with a significantly 
reduced rate of moderate or severe exacerbations compared with LAMA monotherapy 
(rate ratio 0.71, 95% confidence interval 0.60 to 0.85), LAMA and LABA (0.78, 
0.70 to 0.88), and ICS and LABA (0.77, 0.66 to 0.91). Trough forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) and quality of life were favourable with triple 
therapy. The overall safety profile of triple therapy is reassuring, but 
pneumonia was significantly higher with triple therapy than with dual therapy of 
LAMA and LABA (relative risk 1.53, 95% confidence interval 1.25 to 1.87).
CONCLUSIONS: Use of triple therapy resulted in a lower rate of moderate or 
severe exacerbations of COPD, better lung function, and better health related 
quality of life than dual therapy or monotherapy in patients with advanced COPD.
STUDY REGISTRATION: Prospero CRD42018077033.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.k4388
PMCID: PMC6218838
PMID: 30401700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available 
on request from the corresponding author) and declare: no support from any 
organisation for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous 
three years; no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.


12. Ann Pharmacother. 2017 Aug;51(8):696-705. doi: 10.1177/1060028017705149. Epub 
2017 Apr 14.

Role of Long-Acting Muscarinic Antagonist/Long-Acting β(2)-Agonist Therapy in 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Petite SE(1).

Author information:
(1)1 University of Toledo College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Toledo, OH, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the available literature regarding the use of long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting β2 agonists (LABA) and inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS)/LABA combination inhaler therapy in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) maintenance therapy management.
DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE literature search from database inception to February 
2017 was conducted using the search terms chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
adrenergic beta-agonist, muscarinic antagonist, and inhaled corticosteroid. 
References from extracted sources were further searched for any relevant, missed 
data sources.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All English-language randomized-controlled 
trials comparing LAMA/LABA and ICS/LABA combination inhaler therapy were 
evaluated.
DATA SYNTHESIS: A total of 10 randomized controlled trials have reviewed the use 
of LAMA/LABA compared with ICS/LABA therapy for COPD maintenance therapy. 
Results of clinical trials that evaluated LAMA/LABA and ICS/LABA maintenance 
therapy demonstrated superior improvements in pulmonary function tests via 
spirometry and improved clinical outcomes with LAMA/LABA therapy, specifically 
reduction in COPD exacerbation rates. The safety of LAMA/LABA combination 
therapy also is favorable compared with ICS/LABA combination therapy because of 
the increased infection risk with ICS therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: COPD is a disease state with significant morbidity and mortality in 
the United States and is the third leading cause of death. Long-acting inhalers 
are recommended for the majority of COPD severities, and combination therapy is 
typically utilized. LAMA/LABA combination therapy has demonstrated superior 
improvements in pulmonary function and reduction in COPD exacerbation rates 
compared with ICS/LABA. LAMA/LABA combination therapy will have a larger future 
role in COPD maintenance management.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028017705149
PMID: 28410560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Mar 17;12:907-922. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S130482. eCollection 2017.

LABA/LAMA combinations versus LAMA monotherapy or LABA/ICS in COPD: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Rodrigo GJ(1), Price D(2), Anzueto A(3), Singh D(4), Altman P(5), Bader G(6), 
Patalano F(6), Fogel R(5), Kostikas K(6).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Emergencia, Hospital Central de las Fuerzas Armadas, 
Montevideo, Uruguay.
(2)Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of 
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland, UK; Observational and Pragmatic Research 
Institute, Singapore.
(3)University of Texas Health Science Center; South Texas Veterans Health Care 
System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(4)Medicines Evaluation Unit, National Institute for Health Research Respiratory 
and Allergy Clinical Research Facility, University Hospital of South Manchester 
NHS Foundation Trust, University of Manchester, Manchester, England, UK.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(6)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) indicate that long-acting 
bronchodilator combinations, such as β2-agonist (LABA)/muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA), have favorable efficacy compared with commonly used COPD treatments. The 
objective of this analysis was to compare the efficacy and safety of LABA/LAMA 
with LAMA or LABA/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) in adults with stable 
moderate-to-very-severe COPD.
METHODS: This systematic review and meta-analysis (PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, 
Cochrane Library and clinical trial/manufacturer databases) included RCTs 
comparing ≥12 weeks' LABA/LAMA treatment with LAMA and/or LABA/ICS (approved 
doses only). Eligible studies were independently selected by two authors using 
predefined data fields; the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses guidelines were followed.
RESULTS: Eighteen studies (23 trials) were eligible (N=20,185). LABA/LAMA 
significantly improved trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) from 
baseline to week 12 versus both LAMA and LABA/ICS (0.07 L and 0.08 L, P<0.0001), 
with patients more likely to achieve clinically important improvements in FEV1 
of >100 mL (risk ratio [RR]: 1.33, 95% confidence interval [CI]: [1.20, 1.46] 
and RR: 1.44, 95% CI: [1.33, 1.56], respectively, the number needed to treat 
being eight and six, respectively). LABA/LAMA improved transitional dyspnea 
index and St George's Respiratory Questionnaire scores at week 12 versus LAMA 
(both P<0.0001), but not versus LABA/ICS, and reduced rescue medication use 
versus both (P<0.0001 and P=0.001, respectively). LABA/LAMA significantly 
reduced moderate/severe exacerbation rate compared with LABA/ICS (RR 0.82, 95% 
CI: [0.75, 0.91]). Adverse event (AE) incidence was no different for LABA/LAMA 
versus LAMA treatment, but it was lower versus LABA/ICS (RR 0.94, 95% CI: [0.89, 
0.99]), including a lower pneumonia risk (RR 0.59, 95% CI: [0.43, 0.81]). 
LABA/LAMA presented a lower risk for withdrawals due to lack of efficacy versus 
LAMA (RR: 0.66, 95% CI: [0.51, 0.87]) and due to AEs versus LABA/ICS (RR: 0.83, 
95% CI: [0.69, 0.99]).
CONCLUSION: The greater efficacy and comparable safety profiles observed with 
LABA/LAMA combinations versus LAMA or LABA/ICS support their potential role as 
first-line treatment options in COPD. These findings are of direct relevance to 
clinical practice because we included all currently available LABA/LAMAs and 
comparators, only at doses approved for clinical use.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S130482
PMCID: PMC5364009
PMID: 28360514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure GJR has participated as a lecturer, 
speaker and advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship of 
Air Products and Chemicals Inc, Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Laboratorios Dr Esteve, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Sharp & Dome and Novartis. DP has 
board membership with Aerocrine, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, and Teva Pharmaceuticals; consultancy 
agreements with Almirall, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals, and Theravance; grants and unrestricted funding for 
investigator-initiated studies (conducted through Observational and Pragmatic 
Research Institute Pte Ltd) from Aerocrine, AKL Ltd, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, British Lung Foundation, Chiesi, Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Respiratory Effectiveness Group, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceuticals, 
Theravance, UK National Health Service, Zentiva; payment for lectures/speaking 
engagements from Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Kyorin, Meda, Merck, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Skyepharma, 
Takeda, and Teva Pharmaceuticals; payment for manuscript preparation from 
Mundipharma and Teva Pharmaceuticals; payment for the development of educational 
materials from Mundipharma and Novartis; payment for 
travel/accommodation/meeting expenses from Aerocrine, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, and Teva Pharmaceuticals; funding for 
patient enrolment or completion of research from Chiesi, Novartis, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals, and Zentiva; stock/stock options from AKL Ltd which produces 
phytopharmaceuticals; owns 74% of the social enterprise Optimum Patient Care 
Ltd, UK and 74% of Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd, 
Singapore; and is peer reviewer for grant committees of the Efficacy and 
Mechanism Evaluation programme, HTA, and Medical Research Council. AA has acted 
as a Consultant and has served on advisory boards for Novartis Pharma AG, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline and Sunnovion. DS has 
received sponsorship to attend international meetings, honoraria for lecturing 
or attending advisory boards and research grants from various pharmaceutical 
companies, including Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, Merck, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Respivert, 
Skyepharma, Takeda, Teva, Therevance and Verona. PA, GB, FP, RF and KK are 
employees and shareholders of Novartis Pharma AG. KK had previously received 
honoraria for educational activities and lectures from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, Elpen, and Novartis, and participated on advisory boards 
arranged by AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Elpen, and Novartis. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this work.


14. JAMA. 2018 Apr 10;319(14):1473-1484. doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.2757.

Association of Inhaled Corticosteroids and Long-Acting Muscarinic Antagonists 
With Asthma Control in Patients With Uncontrolled, Persistent Asthma: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Sobieraj DM(1), Baker WL(1), Nguyen E(1), Weeda ER(1), Coleman CI(1), White 
CM(1), Lazarus SC(2), Blake KV(3), Lang JE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, University of Connecticut School of 
Pharmacy, Storrs.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of California, 
San Francisco.
(3)Center for Pharmacogenomics and Translational Research, Nemours Children's 
Specialty Care, Jacksonville, Florida.
(4)Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Pulmonary Medicine, Duke University 
School of Medicine, Duke Children's Hospital and Health Center, Durham, North 
Carolina.

Erratum in
    JAMA. 2018 May 8;319(18):1939.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2018 Apr 10;319(14 ):1441-1443.
    Ann Intern Med. 2018 Jul 17;169(2):JC4.

IMPORTANCE: Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) are a potential adjunct 
therapy to inhaled corticosteroids in the management of persistent asthma.
OBJECTIVE: To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects 
associated with LAMA vs placebo or vs other controllers as an add-on therapy to 
inhaled corticosteroids and the use of a LAMA as add-on therapy to inhaled 
corticosteroids and long-acting β-agonists (LABAs; hereafter referred to as 
triple therapy) vs inhaled corticosteroids and LABA in patients with 
uncontrolled, persistent asthma.
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cochrane databases, and clinical trial registries 
(earliest date through November 28, 2017).
STUDY SELECTION: Two reviewers selected randomized clinical trials or 
observational studies evaluating a LAMA vs placebo or vs another controller as 
an add-on therapy to inhaled corticosteroids or triple therapy vs inhaled 
corticosteroids and LABA in patients with uncontrolled, persistent asthma 
reporting on an outcome of interest.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Meta-analyses using a random-effects model was 
conducted to calculate risk ratios (RRs), risk differences (RDs), and mean 
differences (MDs) with corresponding 95% CIs. Citation screening, data 
abstraction, risk assessment, and strength-of-evidence grading were completed by 
2 independent reviewers.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Asthma exacerbations.
RESULTS: Of 1326 records identified, 15 randomized clinical trials (N = 7122 
patients) were included. Most trials assessed adding LAMA vs placebo or LAMA vs 
LABA to inhaled corticosteroids. Adding LAMA vs placebo to inhaled 
corticosteroids was associated with a significantly reduced risk of exacerbation 
requiring systemic corticosteroids (RR, 0.67 [95% CI, 0.48 to 0.92]; RD, -0.02 
[95% CI, -0.04 to 0.00]). Compared with adding LABA, adding LAMA to inhaled 
corticosteroids was not associated with significant improvements in exacerbation 
risk (RR, 0.87 [95% CI, 0.53 to 1.42]; RD, 0.00 [95% CI, -0.02 to 0.02]), or any 
other outcomes of interest. Triple therapy was not significantly associated with 
improved exacerbation risk vs inhaled corticosteroids and LABA (RR, 0.84 [95% 
CI, 0.57 to 1.22]; RD, -0.01 [95% CI, -0.08 to 0.07]).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this systematic review and meta-analysis, the use 
of LAMA compared with placebo as add-on therapy to inhaled corticosteroids was 
associated with a lower risk of asthma exacerbations; however, the association 
of LAMA with benefit may not be greater than that with LABA. Triple therapy was 
not associated with a lower risk of exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2018.2757
PMCID: PMC5876909
PMID: 29554174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors 
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest. Dr Lazarus reported consulting for the University of 
Connecticut. Dr Blake reported consulting for the University of Connecticut and 
receiving grant funding from Nemours Children’s Health System. No other 
disclosures were reported.


15. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Jan 21;(1):CD011721. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011721.pub2.

Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) added to combination long-acting 
beta2-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids (LABA/ICS) versus LABA/ICS for adults 
with asthma.

Kew KM(1), Dahri K.

Author information:
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London, 
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

BACKGROUND: Maintenance treatment with long-acting beta2-agonists and inhaled 
corticosteroids (LABA/ICS) can relieve asthma symptoms and reduce the frequency 
of exacerbations, but there are limited treatment options for people who do not 
gain control on combination LABA/ICS. Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) 
are a class of inhaled drug which have been effective for people with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease and are now becoming available for people with 
asthma to take alongside their LABA/ICS inhaler.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of adding a long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) to combination long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) and inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) in adults whose asthma is not well controlled by LABA/ICS.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Review Group 
Specialised Register (CAGR) up to January 2016. We also searched 
ClinicalTrials.gov, the WHO trials portal, and reference lists of other reviews, 
and we contacted trial authors for additional information.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of 
at least 12 weeks' duration. Studies met the inclusion criteria if they compared 
LAMA as an add-on to LABA/ICS versus LABA/ICS alone for adults with asthma. We 
included studies reported as full text, those published as abstract only, and 
unpublished data. Primary outcomes were exacerbations requiring oral 
corticosteroids (OCS), validated measures of asthma control, and serious adverse 
events (including mortality).
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors screened searches and 
independently extracted details on risk of bias and numerical data. We analysed 
dichotomous data as odds ratios (ORs) and continuous data as mean differences 
(MD) using a random-effects model. We rated all outcomes using GRADE.
MAIN RESULTS: We found four double-blind, double-dummy trials comparing LAMA to 
placebo, including 1197 people with asthma taking combination LABA/ICS. One of 
the trials was designed to study glycopyrronium bromide but was withdrawn prior 
to enrolment, and the other three all studied tiotropium bromide (mostly 5 µg 
once daily via Respimat) over 48 to 52 weeks. People in the trials had a mean 
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of 55% of their predicted value, 
indicating severe asthma.People randomised to take tiotropium add-on had fewer 
exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids than those continuing to take 
LABA/ICS alone, but the confidence intervals did not rule out no difference (OR 
0.76, 95% CI 0.57 to 1.02; moderate quality evidence). Over 48 weeks, 328 out of 
1000 people taking their usual LABA/ICS would have to take oral corticosteroids 
for an exacerbation compared with 271 if they took tiotropium as well (95% CI 
218 to 333 per 1000). Analyses comparing the number of exacerbations per patient 
in each group (rate ratio) and the time until first exacerbation (hazard ratio) 
were in keeping with the main result. Quality of life, as measured by the Asthma 
Quality of Life Questionnaire (AQLQ) was no better for those taking tiotropium 
add-on than for those taking LABA/ICS alone when considered in light of the 0.5 
minimal clinically important difference on the scale (MD 0.09, 95% CI - 0.03 to 
0.20), and evidence for whether tiotropium increased or decreased serious 
adverse events in this population was inconsistent (OR 0.60, 95% CI 0.24 to 
1.47; I(2) = 76%).Within the secondary outcomes, exacerbations requiring 
hospital admission were too rare to tell whether tiotropium was beneficial over 
LABA/ICS alone. There was high quality evidence showing benefits to lung 
function (trough FEV1 and forced vital capacity (FVC)) and potentially small 
benefits to asthma control. People taking tiotropium add-on were less likely to 
experience non-serious adverse events.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium add-on may have additional benefits over 
LABA/ICS alone in reducing the need for rescue oral steroids in people with 
severe asthma. The effect was imprecise, and there was no evidence for other 
LAMA preparations. Possible benefits on quality of life were negligible, and 
evidence for the effect on serious adverse events was inconsistent. There are 
likely to be small added benefits for tiotropium Respimat 5 µg daily on lung 
function and asthma control over LABA/ICS alone and fewer non-serious adverse 
events. The benefit of tiotropium add-on on the frequency of hospital admission 
is still unknown, despite year-long trials.Ongoing and future trials should 
clearly describe participants' background medications to help clinicians judge 
how the findings relate to stepwise care. If studies test LAMAs other than 
tiotropium Respimat for asthma, they should be at least six months long and use 
accepted and validated outcomes to allow comparisons of the safety and 
effectiveness between different preparations.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011721.pub2
PMID: 26798035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. COPD. 2016 Dec;13(6):677-685. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2016.1170799. Epub 2016 May 
5.

Long-acting Muscarinic Antagonist Versus Inhaled Corticosteroid when Added to 
Long-acting β-agonist for COPD: A Meta-analysis.

Oba Y(1), Chandran AV(1), Devasahayam JV(1).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Environmental Medicine, School of 
Medicine, University of Missouri , Columbia , Missouri , USA.

The purpose of this study was to systematically review the efficacy and safety 
of long-acting β-agonist/long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LABA/LAMA) and 
LABA/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) combinations in patients with advanced chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Randomized clinical trials of at least 
12 weeks of duration comparing LABA/LAMA and LABA/ICS combinations were 
included. We chose forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), St. George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) score, Transitional Dyspnea Index (TDI), COPD 
Assessment Test (CAT) score, COPD exacerbations, mortality, and other safety 
parameters as outcome assessment criteria. We included six randomized controlled 
trials with a total of 4,319 patients. Most patients did not have a history of 
exacerbation. LABA/LAMA was associated with greater improvement in FEV1 than 
LABA/ICS (mean difference (MD) 0.09L, 95%confidence interval (CI) 0.07 to 0.11L; 
high certainty). Two treatments appeared clinically equivalent in improving SGRQ 
(MD -0.12, 95%CI -1.16 to 0.92; high certainty), TDI (MD 0.15, 95%CI -0.05 to 
0.35; high certainty), and CAT scores (MD 0.28 95%CI -0.29 to 0.85; moderate 
certainty). LABA/LAMA was associated with an absolute reduction of approximately 
8% in the incidence of pneumonia compared with LABA/ICS (risk ratio 0.41, 95%CI 
0.18 to 0.94; moderate certainty). There was no significant difference in safety 
and exacerbation outcomes. However, equivalence of two treatments could not be 
concluded due to imprecision especially for mortality, cardiac serious adverse 
events, and severe exacerbations. Our findings support the use of dual 
long-acting bronchodilators for patients with advanced COPD but without frequent 
exacerbations given the excess risk of pneumonia with LABA/ICS.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2016.1170799
PMID: 27148815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Indian J Pediatr. 2018 Sep;85(9):773-781. doi: 10.1007/s12098-018-2705-1. Epub 
2018 Jun 9.

What is New in the Management of Childhood Asthma?

Gupta A(1)(2), Bhat G(3), Pianosi P(4)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, NHS Foundation Trust, King's 
College Hospital, Denmark Hill, London, UK. atul.gupta@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)King's College London, London, UK. atul.gupta@kcl.ac.uk.
(3)King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Department of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, NHS Foundation Trust, King's 
College Hospital, Denmark Hill, London, UK.

Asthma still causes considerable morbidity and mortality globally and minimal 
improvement has been seen in key outcomes over the last decade despite 
increasing treatment costs. This review summarizes recent advances in the 
management of asthma in children and adolescents. It focuses on the need for 
personalized treatment plans based on heterogenous asthma pathophysiology, the 
use of the terminology 'asthma attack' over exacerbation to instill widespread 
understanding of severity, and the need for every attack to trigger a structured 
review and focused strategy. The authors discuss difficulties in diagnosing 
asthma, accuracy and use of Fractional exhaled nitric oxide both as second line 
test and as a method to monitor treatment adherence or guide the choice of 
pharmacotherapy. The authors discuss acute and long-term management of asthma. 
Asthma treatment goals are to minimize symptom burden, prevent attacks and 
(where possible) reduce risk and impact of progressive pathophysiology and 
adverse outcomes. The authors discuss pharmacological management; optimal use of 
short acting β2 agonists, long acting muscarinic antagonist (tiotropium), use of 
which is relatively new in pediatrics, allergen specific immunotherapy, 
biological monoclonal antibody treatment, azalide antibiotic azithromycin, and 
the use of vitamin D. They also discuss electronic monitoring and adherence 
devices, direct observation of therapy via mobile device, temperature controlled 
laminar airflow device, and the importance of considering when symptoms may 
actually result from dysfunctional breathing rather than asthma.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-018-2705-1
PMCID: PMC6132827
PMID: 29948729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.


18. Rev Med Liege. 2019 Jan;74(1):54-60.

[IMPACT study in COPD].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Corhay JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Pneumologie CHU Sart Tilman, Liège, Belgique.

The role of the anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator triple therapy, including a 
long acting ß2-agonist (LABA), a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and an 
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), in the prevention of the exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is still not clearly established, and 
requires comparison with dual therapy (LABA-CSI or LABA-LAMA). IMPACT is a phase 
3, double-blind randomized study comparing the tritherapy (LABA-LAMA-ICS) in a 
single inhaler (vilanterol 25 ?g/umeclidinium 62.5 ?g/fluticasone furoate 100 
?g) with the LABA-ICS association (vilanterol 25 ?g-fluticasone furoate 100 ?g) 
and the combination LABA-LAMA (vilanterol 25 ?g/umeclidinium 62.5 ?g) on the 
reduction of the rate of exacerbation as the primary outcome, but also on the 
pulmonary function, the quality of life, the dyspnea and the mortality.Triple 
therapy by comparison with dual therapy (LABA-ICS or LABA-LAMA) improves 
numerous parameters such as the rate of moderate to severe exacerbations, the 
symptoms, the respiratory function, the quality of life, while being well 
tolerated. Finally, the IMPACT study gives an "evidence base" for the GOLD 
guidelines proposing triple therapy in symptomatic COPD patients presenting 
exacerbations despite dual therapy.

Publisher: La place de la trithérapie bronchodilatatrice et anti-inflammatoire, 
comprenant un bêta-2 mimétique à longue durée d’action (LABA), un 
anticholinergique à longue durée d’action (LAMA) et un corticostéroïde inhalé 
(CSI), dans la prévention des exacerbations de la bronchopneumopathie chronique 
obstructive (BPCO) n’est pas encore clairement établie, et nécessite une 
comparaison avec les associations de LABA-CSI ou les combinaisons LABA-LAMA. 
IMPACT est une étude randomisée en double aveugle de phase 3 comparant la 
trithérapie (LABA-LAMA-CSI) en un seul inhalateur (vilantérol 25 ?g/ 
uméclidinium 62,5 ?g/fluticasone furoate 100 ?g) avec une association LABA-CSI 
(vilantérol 25 ?g-fluticasone furoate 100 ?g) et une combinaison LABA-LAMA 
(vilantérol 25 ?g/uméclidinium 62,5 ?g) sur la réduction du taux d’exacerbations 
comme critère de jugement primaire, mais aussi sur la fonction respiratoire, la 
qualité de vie, la dyspnée et la mortalité. La trithérapie entraîne une 
diminution significative du taux d’exacerbations modérées ou sévères, améliore 
la dyspnée, la fonction respiratoire et la qualité de vie par rapport à 
l’association fluticasone-vilantérol et la bithérapie bronchodilatatrice 
uméclidinium-vilantérol chez des patients BPCO symptomatiques et présentant des 
exacerbations, tout en étant bien tolérée. Finalement, l’étude IMPACT apporte 
une évidence clinique aux directives du GOLD proposant la trithérapie chez des 
patients BPCO symptomatiques présentant toujours des exacerbations malgré une 
bithérapie.

PMID: 30680975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Oct 9;13:3203-3231. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S173472. eCollection 2018.

Comparative efficacy of inhaled medications (ICS/LABA, LAMA, LAMA/LABA and SAMA) 
for COPD: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.

Aziz MIA(1), Tan LE(1), Wu DB(1), Pearce F(1), Chua GSW(2), Lin L(1), Tan PT(1), 
Ng K(1).

Author information:
(1)Agency for Care Effectiveness, Ministry of Health, Singapore, 
ng_kwong_hoe@moh.gov.sg.
(2)Division of Medicine, Ng Teng Fong General Hospital, Singapore.

PURPOSE: To assess the comparative efficacy of short-acting muscarinic 
antagonists (SAMAs), long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), LAMA in 
combination with long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs; LAMA/LABAs) and inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) in combination with LABA (ICS/LABAs) for the maintenance 
treatment of COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We systematically reviewed 74 randomized controlled 
trials (74,832 participants) published up to 15 November 2017, which compared 
any of the interventions (SAMA [ipratropium], LAMA [aclidinium, glycopyrronium, 
tiotropium, umeclidinium], LAMA/LABA [aclidinium/formoterol, 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium, tiotropium/olodaterol, umeclidinium/vilanterol] and 
ICS/LABA [fluticasone/vilanterol, budesonide/formoterol, 
salmeterol/fluticasone]) with each other or with placebo. A random-effects 
network meta-analysis combining direct and indirect evidence was conducted to 
examine the change from baseline in trough FEV1, transition dyspnea index, St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire and frequency of adverse events at weeks 12 
and 24.
RESULTS: Inconsistency models were not statistically significant for all 
outcomes. LAMAs, LAMA/LABAs and ICS/LABAs led to a significantly greater 
improvement in trough FEV1 compared with placebo and SAMA monotherapy at weeks 
12 and 24. All LAMA/LABAs, except aclidinium/formoterol, were statistically 
significantly better than LAMA monotherapy and ICS/LABAs in improving trough 
FEV1. Among the LAMAs, umeclidinium showed statistically significant improvement 
in trough FEV1 at week 12 compared to tiotropium and glycopyrronium, but the 
results were not clinically significant. LAMA/LABAs had the highest 
probabilities of being ranked the best agents in FEV1 improvement. Similar 
trends were observed for the transition dyspnea index and St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire outcomes. There were no significant differences in the 
incidences of adverse events among all treatment options.
CONCLUSION: LAMA/LABA showed the greatest improvement in trough FEV1 at weeks 12 
and 24 compared with the other inhaled drug classes, while SAMA showed the least 
improvement. There were no significant differences among the LAMAs and 
LAMA/LABAs within their respective classes.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S173472
PMCID: PMC6186767
PMID: 30349228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


20. Respir Res. 2017 Nov 2;18(1):182. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0647-1.

A 28-day, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group study of 
nebulized revefenacin in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Pudi KK(1), Barnes CN(2), Moran EJ(2), Haumann B(3), Kerwin E(4).

Author information:
(1)Upstate Pharmaceutical Research, Greenville, SC, USA.
(2)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Theravance Biopharma UK Limited, London, UK. bhaumann@theravance.com.
(4)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, Medford, OR, USA.

BACKGROUND: Revefenacin is a once-daily long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
in clinical development for the treatment of patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). In a dose-ranging study, nebulized once-daily 
revefenacin had a long duration of action in patients after 7 days' 
administration of doses up to 700 μg. In this multiple-dose study, the 
bronchodilation efficacy and adverse events profile were characterized in 
patients administered nebulized revefenacin once daily for 28 days.
METHODS: A total of 355 COPD patients (mean age 62 years, mean forced expiratory 
volume in 1 s [FEV1] 44% of predicted) were randomized in a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled parallel group study. Inhaled corticosteroids as well as 
short-acting bronchodilators were permitted. Once-daily treatments (44, 88, 175 
or 350 μg revefenacin or matching placebo) were administered by a standard jet 
nebulizer, for 28 days. The primary endpoint was change from baseline in D28 
trough FEV1, and secondary endpoints included weighted mean FEV1 over 0 to 24 h 
and rescue medication (albuterol) use. Safety evaluations included adverse 
events, laboratory assessments, electrocardiograms and 24-h Holter profiles.
RESULTS: Revefenacin (88, 175 and 350 μg) significantly improved D28 trough FEV1 
over placebo (187.4, 166.6 and 170.6 mL, respectively, all p < 0.001); 44 μg 
produced a sub-therapeutic response. At doses ≥88 μg, more than 80% of patients 
achieved at least a 100-mL increase from baseline FEV1 in the first 4 h post 
dose compared with 33% of placebo patients. For doses ≥88 μg, D28 24 h weighted 
mean differences from placebo for FEV1 were numerically similar to respective 
trough FEV1 values, indicating bronchodilation was sustained for 24 h post dose. 
Doses ≥88 μg reduced the average number of albuterol puffs/day by more than one 
puff/day. The 350 μg dose did not demonstrate additional efficacy over that 
observed with 175 μg revefenacin. Revefenacin was generally well tolerated, with 
minimal reports of systemic anti-cholinergic effects.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that 88 and 175 μg revefenacin are appropriate 
doses for use in longer-term safety and efficacy trials. Revefenacin offers the 
potential for the first once-daily LAMA for nebulization in patients with COPD 
who require or prefer a nebulized drug delivery option.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02040792 . Registered January 16, 
2014.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0647-1
PMCID: PMC5667509
PMID: 29096627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
protocol and all amendments were approved by local review boards, ethics 
committees and health authorities at each of the 41 study centers. All patients 
provided written informed consent. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: KP has no disclosures. CB, EM and BH are employees of the 
Theravance Biopharma group of companies. EK is a consultant for Amphastar, Astra 
Zeneca, Forest, Mylan, Novartis, Sunovion, Teva and Theravance Biopharma. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.