1. Eur Respir J. 2018 Dec 13;52(6):1801586. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01586-2018. Print 
2018 Dec.

Triple therapy versus single and dual long-acting bronchodilator therapy 
in COPD: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Cazzola M(1), Rogliani P(1), Calzetta L(1), Matera MG(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Dept of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(2)Unit of Pharmacology, Dept of Experimental Medicine, University of Campania 
"Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.

We performed a meta-analysis to compare the impact of triple combination therapy 
with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) and 
long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMAs) versus LABA/LAMA combination 
therapy or single long-acting bronchodilator therapy in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. The ICS/LABA/LAMA combination reduced the risk of 
exacerbation (relative risk 0.70, 95% CI 0.53-0.94) and improved trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (mean difference in mL +37.94, 95% CI 18.83-53.89) 
versus LABA/LAMA combination therapy. The protective effect of triple 
combination therapy versus LABA/LAMA combination therapy against risk of 
exacerbation was greater in patients with blood eosinophil counts 
≥300 cells·µL-1 (relative risk 0.57, 95% CI 0.48-0.68). While ∼38 patients had 
to be treated for 1 year with ICS/LABA/LAMA combination therapy to prevent one 
exacerbation compared to LABA/LAMA combination therapy, the number needed to 
treat (NNT) was ∼21 when compared to single long-acting bronchodilator therapy. 
The person-based NNT per year of ICS/LABA/LAMA combination therapy versus 
LABA/LAMA combination therapy was significantly (p<0.05) lower in patients with 
eosinophil counts ≥300 cells·µL-1 (NNT value: 8.58) than in those with counts 
<300 cells·µL-1 (NNT value: 46.28). The risk of pneumonia did not differ between 
ICS/LABA/LAMA combination therapy and its comparators. The number needed to harm 
was ∼195. This meta-analysis suggests that patients on single long-acting 
bronchodilator therapy or LABA/LAMA combination therapy, who still have 
exacerbations and have blood eosinophil counts ≥300 cells·µL-1, could benefit 
from ICS/LABA/LAMA combination therapy.

Copyright ©ERS 2018.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.01586-2018
PMID: 30309975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: M. Cazzola has 
participated as a faculty member and advisor in scientific meetings and courses 
under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Group, Lallemand, Mundipharma, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Recipharm, Verona Pharma and Zambon, and is or has been a 
consultant to ABC Farmaceutici, AstraZeneca, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Recipharm, 
Lallemand, Novartis, Ockham Biotech, Verona Pharma and Zambon. His department 
was funded by Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and Zambon. Conflict of 
interest: P. Rogliani participated as a lecturer and advisor in scientific 
meetings and courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Biofutura, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Group, 
Mundipharma and Novartis. Her department was funded by Almirall, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Novartis and Zambon. Conflict of interest: 
L. Calzetta has participated as an advisor in scientific meetings under the 
sponsorship of Boehringer Ingelheim and Novartis, received non-financial support 
from AstraZeneca, a research grant partially funded by Chiesi Farmaceutici, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and Almirall, and is or has been a consultant to 
ABC Farmaceutici, Recipharm, Zambon, Verona Pharma and Ockham Biotech. His 
department was funded by Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, 
Novartis and Zambon. Conflict of interest: M.G. Matera has participated as a 
lecturer and advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship of 
Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, 
GlaxoSmithKline and Novartis, and has been a consultant to ABC Farmaceutici and 
Chiesi Farmaceutici. Her department was funded by Novartis.


2. N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 9;374(23):2222-34. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1516385. Epub 2016 
May 15.

Indacaterol-Glycopyrronium versus Salmeterol-Fluticasone for COPD.

Wedzicha JA(1), Banerji D(1), Chapman KR(1), Vestbo J(1), Roche N(1), Ayers 
RT(1), Thach C(1), Fogel R(1), Patalano F(1), Vogelmeier CF(1); FLAME 
Investigators.

Collaborators: Ambrosino N, Budani H, Carminio C, Casal E, De Salvo M, Delgado 
Vizcarra G, Fazio C, Gene R, Hasner C, Luna C, Maillo M, Mariño G, Massola F, 
Mattarucco W, Molina A, Otaola M, Rey LB, Rodriguez A, Rojas RA, Taborda J, 
Tolcachier A, Victorio C, Wehbe L, Willigs Rolon M, Yanez A, Voves R, Wuertz J, 
Wuertz P, Ablinger O, Forstner B, Wallner G, Olschewski H, Koeberl G, Studnicka 
M, Kaehler C, Vincken W, Driesen P, Demedts I, Janssens W, Martinot JB, Aumann 
J, Derom E, Ninane V, Corhay JL, Bogerd SP, Vanderheyde K, Fremault A, Schlesser 
M, Janssens E, Jordens P, Verhaeghe W, Verbuyst R, Ilieva-Fartunova V, Shikov R, 
Hodzhev V, Kostov K, Ivanov Y, Peneva M, Youroukova V, Georgiev O, Subashki M, 
Milcheva V, Chapman KR, Del Carpio J, Fera T, Field S, Killorn P, Landry D, 
Larivee P, Pek B, Tellier G, Mazza G, Sherkin M, Frechette A, Soler T, Pavie J, 
Miranda G, Zheng J, Huang W, Wen Z, Wang H, Cai B, Sun S, Wen F, Xiong W, Wang 
C, Huang Y, Wang L, Xiao Z, Wen G, Liu J, Wan H, Chen P, Yan X, Huang J, Cao J, 
Li Z, Huang M, Vallejo JS, Cardona G, Isaza D, Bolivar F, Tudoric N, Vuksan-Cusa 
T, Samarzija M, Tauchman A, Hadrava M, Holub S, Zitkova M, Ali M, Kopecka D, 
Presperinova J, Povysilova L, Cmakalova M, Mares J, Kocianova J, Skacel Z, Kasak 
V, Musil J, Blahova M, Jirmanova I, Kolek V, Backer V, Ulrik CS, Nielsen C, 
Ottesen A, Seersholm N, Bodtger U, Grzywacz Z, Meyer CN, Nielsen S, Jogi R, 
Meren M, Samaruutel P, Venho K, Elo J, Patovirta RL, Nieminen E, Raatikainen L, 
Saarelainen P, Herer B, Deslee G, Devouassoux G, Jasnot JY, Berger P, Proust A, 
Bourdin A, Boye A, Ballenberger S, Beck E, Benedix A, Birkholz SC, Bollmann L, 
Budweiser S, Deckelmann R, Deimling A, Eberhardt F, Eckhardt G, Eller J, 
Esselmann A, Feldmeyer F, Feussner W, Foerster K, Franz KH, Fritzsche A, 
Gebhardt R, Gernhold M, Gessner C, Haase PU, Heindl S, Hoheisel G, Hueting R, 
Jaeger B, Jandl M, Junggeburth J, Kaessner F, Keller C, Kirschner J, 
Kleinecke-Pohl U, Kroker A, Lammert-Huenger G, Ludwig-Sengpiel A, Mikloweit P, 
Mueller H, Noga O, Reinhardt J, Rueckert P, Schaper L, Schlegel V, Schmoller T, 
Schuermann W, Toepfer V, Wiemer S, Winkler J, Botzen U, Djacenko S, Entzian P, 
Herzig J, Hofbauer P, Kornmann O, Marten I, Overlack A, Preiss G, Schlenska C, 
Sohrab S, Steffen H, Westerhausen U, Zeisler KH, Zemke K, Zingler W, Zuechner D, 
Kaiser A, Tyler K, Ginko T, Marosis K, Gaga A, Siafakas N, Kakoura M, Koulouris 
N, Vasilakopoulos T, Papiris S, Zarogoulidis K, Antoniadis A, Kallergis K, 
Gourgoulianis K, Contreras E, Espana E, Gonzalez E, Guerra J, Martinez G, Hui 
DS, Losonczy G, Vasas S, Varga J, Mark Z, Schlezak J, Balint B, Somfay A, 
Jonsson M, D'Souza G, Arbat A, Sundarakumar S, Vijaykumar NB, Dhar R, Shah N, 
Kashyap AK, Srikanth K, Tripathi S, Gupta N, Samiuddin M, Swarnakar R, Paggiaro 
PL, Idotta G, Mazza F, Cerveri I, Colombo F, Barbaro MP, Riario Sforza GG, 
Pomari C, Zucchi L, Gigliotti F, Clini E, Aiolfi S, Gasparini S, Ceriana P, 
Spanevello A, Carone M, Barisione G, Miyao N, Kiyosue A, Nakatani Y, Harada T, 
Hayakawa H, Kato M, Ogushi F, Nakamura H, Yoshida M, Hataji O, Matsui H, 
Matsumoto M, Taniguchi H, Takeda A, Kishimoto N, Nishio M, Kinoshita M, Kato R, 
Hara N, Tamada T, Hashimoto S, Suzuki M, Hiramatsu T, Shuto H, In KH, Lee S, Kim 
S, Kim J, Kim D, Park M, Kim J, Yoo C, Lee Y, Babjoniseva A, Mitrofanova L, 
Smiltena I, Matukiene V, Nausediene V, Miliauskas S, Susinskiene D, Vebriene J, 
Vaicius D, Volosevic T, Kiziela A, Sileikiene V, Sansores R, Ramirez E, Diaz J, 
Caleco M, Llamas FS, Bantje T, Gans SJ, Goosens M, Sinninghe-Damste HE, de 
Hosson SM, Wielders PL, van der Valk P, Michels AJ, Gronert J, Norheim PD, 
Sparby JA, Risberg K, Karlsson T, Roedolen T, Tomala T, Diaz D, Maliwat A, 
Hernandez JF, Antczak A, Mroz R, Siergiejko Z, Waszkuc-Golonko J, Olechnowicz D, 
Napora P, Batura-Gabryel H, Barbara C, Cardoso J, Moita J, Rodrigues B, Pires N, 
Guimaraes JM, Andre N, Ribeiro V, Mihaicuta S, Petrui ID, Tudorache V, Bulugean 
L, Adina M, Rajnoveanu R, Olar D, Matei D, Toma C, Gica C, Ambert L, Mihaescu T, 
Alexandrescu D, Popovici C, Glontescu ID, Boisteanu D, Vigdorovits M, Jimborean 
G, Mihaltan F, Abrosimov V, Platonov D, Astafieva N, Nosov V, Martynenko T, 
Gantseva K, Shilkina N, Gaydar E, Ignatova G, Khamitov R, Stankovic I, Cekerevac 
I, Ilic A, Vukcevic M, Hrebenar S, Lescisinova H, Golubov A, Oravcova H, Zacik 
M, Zambova RT, Arpasova K, Orolin M, Jurco P, Kretik V, Kavkova D, Mihalecova Y, 
Sarkanova K, Kovacikova L, Kubikova Y, Rozborilova E, Smith C, Abdullah I, 
Bruning A, Visser S, Abdullah I, van Zyl-Smit R, Richter D, Ras G, Joubert J, 
Irusen, de Saracho JO, Echave-Sustaeta J, Pascual LR, Casan P, Ramos D, Roldan 
J, Gonzalez JE, Lista JD, Morera J, Sanchez I, Caballero LM, Rodriguez E, Galdiz 
J, Naval E, Fernandez E, Santa Cruz A, Ruiz AB, Costa JS, Ferrer A, Roig V, 
Velasco JL, Bjermer L, Jul-Nielsen H, Tengmark BO, Blom KB, Perng DW, Yu CJ, 
Cheng SL, Hsu WH, Tsai YH, Hsiue TR, Lin MC, Boonsawat W, Pothirat C, 
Keeratichananont W, Nayci S, Saryal S, Gunen H, Sayiner A, Ortakoylu G, 
Yorgancioglu A, Ozkurt S, Harrison R, Jones N, Bourne S, Saralaya D, Kerrane J, 
DeSoyza A, Fuller L, Litchfield J, Bourke S, Collier D, Gunstone A.

Author information:
(1)From the National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London 
(J.A.W.), and the Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, University of 
Manchester and University Hospital South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, 
Manchester (J.V.) - all in the United Kingdom; Novartis Pharmaceuticals, East 
Hanover, NJ (D.B., R.T.A., C.T., R.F.); Asthma and Airway Centre, University 
Health Network and University of Toronto, Toronto (K.R.C.); Service de 
Pneumologie Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, University Paris Descartes 
(EA2511), Paris (N.R.); Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland (F.P.); and the 
Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University Medical 
Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany 
(C.F.V.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 9;374(23):2284-6.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):899-900.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):897-8.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):898.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep;375(9):898-9.
    Evid Based Med. 2016 Dec;21(6):222.
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Sep;8(9):2383-2386.
    Ann Transl Med. 2016 Dec;4(24):531.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Apr 1;199(7):913-916.

BACKGROUND: Most guidelines recommend either a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) 
plus an inhaled glucocorticoid or a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) as 
the first-choice treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) who have a high risk of exacerbations. The role of treatment with 
a LABA-LAMA regimen in these patients is unclear.
METHODS: We conducted a 52-week, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, 
noninferiority trial. Patients who had COPD with a history of at least one 
exacerbation during the previous year were randomly assigned to receive, by 
inhalation, either the LABA indacaterol (110 μg) plus the LAMA glycopyrronium 
(50 μg) once daily or the LABA salmeterol (50 μg) plus the inhaled 
glucocorticoid fluticasone (500 μg) twice daily. The primary outcome was the 
annual rate of all COPD exacerbations.
RESULTS: A total of 1680 patients were assigned to the 
indacaterol-glycopyrronium group, and 1682 to the salmeterol-fluticasone group. 
Indacaterol-glycopyrronium showed not only noninferiority but also superiority 
to salmeterol-fluticasone in reducing the annual rate of all COPD exacerbations; 
the rate was 11% lower in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the 
salmeterol-fluticasone group (3.59 vs. 4.03; rate ratio, 0.89; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.83 to 0.96; P=0.003). The indacaterol-glycopyrronium group had 
a longer time to the first exacerbation than did the salmeterol-fluticasone 
group (71 days [95% CI, 60 to 82] vs. 51 days [95% CI, 46 to 57]; hazard ratio, 
0.84 [95% CI, 0.78 to 0.91], representing a 16% lower risk; P<0.001). The annual 
rate of moderate or severe exacerbations was lower in the 
indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (0.98 
vs. 1.19; rate ratio, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.75 to 0.91; P<0.001), and the time to the 
first moderate or severe exacerbation was longer in the 
indacaterol-glycopyrronium group than in the salmeterol-fluticasone group 
(hazard ratio, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.70 to 0.86; P<0.001), as was the time to the 
first severe exacerbation (hazard ratio, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.66 to 1.00; P=0.046). 
The effect of indacaterol-glycopyrronium versus salmeterol-fluticasone on the 
rate of COPD exacerbations was independent of the baseline blood eosinophil 
count. The incidence of adverse events and deaths was similar in the two groups. 
The incidence of pneumonia was 3.2% in the indacaterol-glycopyrronium group and 
4.8% in the salmeterol-fluticasone group (P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol-glycopyrronium was more effective than 
salmeterol-fluticasone in preventing COPD exacerbations in patients with a 
history of exacerbation during the previous year. (Funded by Novartis; FLAME 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01782326.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1516385
PMID: 27181606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. JAMA. 2019 Feb 26;321(8):786-797. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.0131.

Diagnosis and Outpatient Management of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A 
Review.

Riley CM(1), Sciurba FC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Department of Medicine, Allergy and Critical Care 
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

IMPORTANCE: There are 30 million adults (12%) in the United States who have 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease accounts for 3.2% of all physician office visits annually and is the 
fourth leading cause of death (126 000 deaths per year). Most patients are 
diagnosed by their primary care clinicians who must address the highly variable 
clinical features and responses to therapy. The diagnosis and treatment of COPD 
is rapidly changing, so understanding recent advances is important for the 
delivery of optimal patient care.
OBSERVATIONS: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is characterized by 
incompletely reversible expiratory airflow limitation. Spirometry is the 
reference standard for diagnosing and assessing the severity of COPD. All 
patients should be counseled about and receive preventive measures such as 
smoking cessation and vaccination. Treatment should be guided by the severity of 
lung impairment, symptoms such as dyspnea, the amount of cough and sputum 
production, and how often a patient experiences an exacerbation. When dyspnea 
limits activity or quality of life, COPD should be treated with once- or 
twice-daily maintenance long acting beta agonists and β-agonist 
bronchodilators. Patients with acute exacerbations may benefit from the addition 
of inhaled corticosteroids, particularly those with elevated peripheral 
eosinophil levels. Pulmonary rehabilitation, which includes strength and 
endurance training and educational, nutritional, and psychosocial support, 
improves symptoms and exercise tolerance but is underutilized. Supplemental 
oxygen for patients with resting hypoxemia (defined as Spo2 <89%) improves 
survival.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a 
complicated disease requiring intensive treatment. Appropriate use of 
long-acting maintenance bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids, and pulmonary 
rehabilitation decreases symptoms, optimizes functional performance, and reduces 
exacerbation frequency. Supplemental oxygen in patients with resting hypoxemia 
prolongs life, and other advanced treatments are available based on specific 
patient characteristics.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2019.0131
PMID: 30806700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. N Engl J Med. 2018 May 3;378(18):1671-1680. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1713901. Epub 
2018 Apr 18.

Once-Daily Single-Inhaler Triple versus Dual Therapy in Patients with COPD.

Lipson DA(1), Barnhart F(1), Brealey N(1), Brooks J(1), Criner GJ(1), Day NC(1), 
Dransfield MT(1), Halpin DMG(1), Han MK(1), Jones CE(1), Kilbride S(1), Lange 
P(1), Lomas DA(1), Martinez FJ(1), Singh D(1), Tabberer M(1), Wise RA(1), Pascoe 
SJ(1); IMPACT Investigators.

Author information:
(1)From GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville (D.A. Lipson, J.B., S.J.P.), and the 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania (D.A. Lipson), and Lewis 
Katz School of Medicine at Temple University (G.J.C.), Philadelphia - all in 
Pennsylvania; GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC (F.B., C.E.J.); 
GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park West, Uxbridge (N.B., N.C.D., S.K., M.T.), the 
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter 
(D.M.G.H.), UCL Respiratory, University College London, London (D.A. Lomas), and 
the Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Institute of Inflammation and 
Repair, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, 
Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester (D.S.) - all in the 
United Kingdom; the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, 
Lung Health Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham (M.T.D.); 
the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor (M.K.H.); the Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen (P.L.), and the Medical Department, Pulmonary Section, 
Herlev-Gentofte Hospital, Herlev (P.L.) - both in Denmark; New York-Presbyterian 
Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York (F.J.M.); and the Division of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore (R.A.W.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2018 May 3;378(18):1723-1724.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Aug 09;379(6):590-1.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Aug 09;379(6):591.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Aug 09;379(6):591-2.
    Ann Intern Med. 2018 Aug 21;169(4):JC16.
    MMW Fortschr Med. 2018 Oct;160(17):34.
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2018 Nov;143(23):1668.

BACKGROUND: The benefits of triple therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) with an inhaled glucocorticoid, a long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA), and a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), as compared with dual 
therapy (either inhaled glucocorticoid-LABA or LAMA-LABA), are uncertain.
METHODS: In this randomized trial involving 10,355 patients with COPD, we 
compared 52 weeks of a once-daily combination of fluticasone furoate (an inhaled 
glucocorticoid) at a dose of 100 μg, umeclidinium (a LAMA) at a dose of 62.5 μg, 
and vilanterol (a LABA) at a dose of 25 μg (triple therapy) with fluticasone 
furoate-vilanterol (at doses of 100 μg and 25 μg, respectively) and 
umeclidinium-vilanterol (at doses of 62.5 μg and 25 μg, respectively). Each 
regimen was administered in a single Ellipta inhaler. The primary outcome was 
the annual rate of moderate or severe COPD exacerbations during treatment.
RESULTS: The rate of moderate or severe exacerbations in the triple-therapy 
group was 0.91 per year, as compared with 1.07 per year in the fluticasone 
furoate-vilanterol group (rate ratio with triple therapy, 0.85; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.80 to 0.90; 15% difference; P<0.001) and 1.21 per year in the 
umeclidinium-vilanterol group (rate ratio with triple therapy, 0.75; 95% CI, 
0.70 to 0.81; 25% difference; P<0.001). The annual rate of severe exacerbations 
resulting in hospitalization in the triple-therapy group was 0.13, as compared 
with 0.19 in the umeclidinium-vilanterol group (rate ratio, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.56 
to 0.78; 34% difference; P<0.001). There was a higher incidence of pneumonia in 
the inhaled-glucocorticoid groups than in the umeclidinium-vilanterol group, and 
the risk of clinician-diagnosed pneumonia was significantly higher with triple 
therapy than with umeclidinium-vilanterol, as assessed in a time-to-first-event 
analysis (hazard ratio, 1.53; 95% CI, 1.22 to 1.92; P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Triple therapy with fluticasone furoate, umeclidinium, and 
vilanterol resulted in a lower rate of moderate or severe COPD exacerbations 
than fluticasone furoate-vilanterol or umeclidinium-vilanterol in this 
population. Triple therapy also resulted in a lower rate of hospitalization due 
to COPD than umeclidinium-vilanterol. (Funded by GlaxoSmithKline; IMPACT 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02164513 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1713901
PMID: 29668352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Dec 3;12(12):CD012620. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD012620.pub2.

Dual combination therapy versus long-acting bronchodilators alone for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): a systematic review and network 
meta-analysis.

Oba Y(1), Keeney E, Ghatehorde N, Dias S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Missouri, 
Columbia, MO, USA.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD012620.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators such as long-acting β-agonist (LABA), 
long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), and LABA/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) 
combinations have been used in people with moderate to severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to control symptoms such as dyspnoea and 
cough, and prevent exacerbations. A number of LABA/LAMA combinations are now 
available for clinical use in COPD. However, it is not clear which group of 
above mentioned inhalers is most effective or if any specific formulation works 
better than the others within the same group or class.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy and safety of available formulations from 
four different groups of inhalers (i.e. LABA/LAMA combination, LABA/ICS 
combination, LAMA and LABA) in people with moderate to severe COPD. The review 
will update previous systematic reviews on dual combination inhalers and 
long-acting bronchodilators to answer the questions described above using the 
strength of a network meta-analysis (NMA).
SEARCH METHODS: We identified studies from the Cochrane Airways Specialised 
Register, which contains several databases. We also conducted a search of 
ClinicalTrials.gov and manufacturers' websites. The most recent searches were 
conducted on 6 April 2018.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that 
recruited people aged 35 years or older with a diagnosis of COPD and a baseline 
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of less than 80% of predicted. We 
included studies of at least 12 weeks' duration including at least two active 
comparators from one of the four inhaler groups.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We conducted NMAs using a Bayesian Markov chain 
Monte Carlo method. We considered a study as high risk if recruited participants 
had at least one COPD exacerbation within the 12 months before study entry and 
as low risk otherwise. Primary outcomes were COPD exacerbations (moderate to 
severe and severe), and secondary outcomes included symptom and quality-of-life 
scores, safety outcomes, and lung function. We collected data only for active 
comparators and did not consider placebo was not considered. We assumed a 
class/group effect when a fixed-class model fitted well. Otherwise we used a 
random-class model to assess intraclass/group differences. We supplemented the 
NMAs with pairwise meta-analyses.
MAIN RESULTS: We included a total of 101,311 participants from 99 studies (26 
studies with 32,265 participants in the high-risk population and 73 studies with 
69,046 participants in the low-risk population) in our systematic review. The 
median duration of studies was 52 weeks in the high-risk population and 26 weeks 
in the low-risk population (range 12 to 156 for both populations). We considered 
the quality of included studies generally to be good.The NMAs suggested that the 
LABA/LAMA combination was the highest ranked treatment group to reduce COPD 
exacerbations followed by LAMA in the both populations.There is evidence that 
the LABA/LAMA combination decreases moderate to severe exacerbations compared to 
LABA/ICS combination, LAMA, and LABA in the high-risk population (network hazard 
ratios (HRs) 0.86 (95% credible interval (CrI) 0.76 to 0.99), 0.87 (95% CrI 0.78 
to 0.99), and 0.70 (95% CrI 0.61 to 0.8) respectively), and that LAMA decreases 
moderate to severe exacerbations compared to LABA in the high- and low-risk 
populations (network HR 0.80 (95% CrI 0.71 to 0.88) and 0.87 (95% CrI 0.78 to 
0.97), respectively). There is evidence that the LABA/LAMA combination reduces 
severe exacerbations compared to LABA/ICS combination and LABA in the high-risk 
population (network HR 0.78 (95% CrI 0.64 to 0.93) and 0.64 (95% CrI 0.51 to 
0.81), respectively).There was a general trend towards a greater improvement in 
symptom and quality-of-life scores with the combination therapies compared to 
monotherapies, and the combination therapies were generally ranked higher than 
monotherapies.The LABA/ICS combination was the lowest ranked in pneumonia 
serious adverse events (SAEs) in both populations. There is evidence that the 
LABA/ICS combination increases the odds of pneumonia compared to LAMA/LABA 
combination, LAMA and LABA (network ORs: 1.69 (95% CrI 1.20 to 2.44), 1.78 (95% 
CrI 1.33 to 2.39), and 1.50 (95% CrI 1.17 to 1.92) in the high-risk population 
and network or pairwise OR: 2.33 (95% CI 1.03 to 5.26), 2.02 (95% CrI 1.16 to 
3.72), and 1.93 (95% CrI 1.29 to 3.22) in the low-risk population respectively). 
There were significant overlaps in the rank statistics in the other safety 
outcomes including mortality, total, COPD, and cardiac SAEs, and dropouts due to 
adverse events.None of the differences in lung function met a minimal clinically 
important difference criterion except for LABA/LAMA combination versus LABA in 
the high-risk population (network mean difference 0.13 L (95% CrI 0.10 to 0.15). 
The results of pairwise meta-analyses generally agreed with those of the NMAs. 
There is no evidence to suggest intraclass/group differences except for lung 
function at 12 months in the high-risk population.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The LABA/LAMA combination was the highest ranked treatment 
group to reduce COPD exacerbations although there was some uncertainty in the 
results. LAMA containing inhalers may have an advantage over those without a 
LAMA for preventing COPD exacerbations based on the rank statistics. Combination 
therapies appear more effective than monotherapies for improving symptom and 
quality-of-life scores. ICS-containing inhalers are associated with an increased 
risk of pneumonia.Our most comprehensive review including intraclass/group 
comparisons, free combination therapies, 99 studies, and 20 outcomes for each 
high- and low-risk population summarises the current literature and could help 
with updating existing COPD guidelines.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012620.pub2
PMCID: PMC6517098
PMID: 30521694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Yuji Oba: none known Edna Keeney: none known 
Namratta Ghatehorde: none known Sofia Dias: Pfizer Portugal, Novartis and 
Boehringer Ingelheim have paid fees to the University of Bristol for seminars. 
Sofia Dias is a co‐applicant on a grant by which Pfizer is partially sponsoring 
a researcher (not herself).


6. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Feb 10;2(2):CD012066. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD012066.pub2.

long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) plus long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) 
versus LABA plus inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) for stable chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).

Horita N(1), Goto A(2), Shibata Y(1), Ota E(3), Nakashima K(1), Nagai K(1), 
Kaneko T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Yokohama City University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Fukuura 3-9, Kanazawa, Yokohama, Japan, 236-0004.
(2)Metabolic Epidemiology Section, Division of Epidemiology, Center for Public 
Health Sciences, National Cancer Center, Tokyo, Japan, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan, 104-0045.
(3)Global Health Nursing, St. Luke's International University, Graduate School 
of Nursing Sciences, 10-1 Akashi-cho, Chuo-Ku, Tokyo, Japan, 104-0044.

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2017 Oct;22(5):183-184.

BACKGROUND: Three classes of inhaler medications are used to manage chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): long-acting beta-agonists (LABA), 
long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA), and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). 
When two classes of medications are required, LAMA plus LABA (LAMA+LABA) and 
LABA plus ICS (LABA+ICS) are often selected because these combinations can be 
administered via a single medication device. The previous Global Initiative for 
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) guidance recommended LABA+ICS as the 
first-line treatment for managing stable COPD in high-risk people of categories 
C and D. However, the updated GOLD 2017 guidance recommends LAMA+LABA over 
LABA+ICS.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the benefits and harms of LAMA+LABA versus LABA+ICS for 
treatment of people with stable COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We performed an electronic search of the Cochrane Airways Group 
Specialised Register (2 February 2016), ClinicalTrials.gov (4 June 2016), and 
the World Health Organization Clinical Trials Search Portal (4 June 2016), 
followed by a handsearch (5 June 2016). Two review authors screened and 
scrutinised the selected articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included individual randomised controlled trials, 
parallel-group trials, and cross-over trials comparing LAMA+LABA and LABA+ICS 
for stable COPD. The minimum accepted trial duration was one month and trials 
should have been conducted in an outpatient setting.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted data 
and evaluated risk of bias. We resolved any discrepancies through discussion. We 
analysed dichotomous data as odds ratios (OR), and continuous data as mean 
differences (MD), with 95% confidence interval (CI) using Review Manager 5. 
Exacerbations were measured by counting the number of people experiencing one or 
more exacerbation.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 11 studies comprising 9839 participants in our 
quantitative analysis. Most studies included people with moderate to severe 
COPD, without recent exacerbations. One pharmaceutical sponsored trial that 
included only people with recent exacerbations was the largest study and 
accounted for 37% of participants. All but one study were sponsored by 
pharmaceutical companies, thus we rated them as having a high risk of 'other 
bias'. The unsponsored study was at high risk of performance and detection bias, 
and possible selective reporting.Five studies recruited GOLD Category B 
participants, one study recruited Category D participants, two studies recruited 
Category A/B participants, and three studies recruited participants regardless 
of category. Follow-up ranged from 6 to 52 weeks.Compared to the LABA+ICS arm, 
the results for the pooled primary outcomes for the LAMA+LABA arm were as 
follows: exacerbations, OR 0.82 (95% CI 0.70 to 0.96, P = 0.01, I2 = 17%, low 
quality evidence); serious adverse events (SAE), OR 0.91 (95% CI 0.79 to 1.05, P 
= 0.18, I2 = 0, moderate quality evidence); St. George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score change from the baseline, MD -1.22 (95% CI 
-2.52 to 0.07, P = 0.06, I2 = 71%, low quality evidence); and trough forced 
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) change from the baseline, MD 0.08 L (95% 
CI 0.06 to 0.09, P < 0.0001, I2 = 50%, moderate quality evidence). Compared to 
the LABA+ICS arm, the results for the pooled secondary outcomes for the 
LAMA+LABA arm were as follows: pneumonia, OR 0.57 (95% CI 0.42 to 0.79, P = 
0.0006, I2 = 0%, low quality evidence); all-cause death, OR 1.01 (95% CI 0.61 to 
1.67, P = 0.88, I2 = 0%, low quality evidence); and SGRQ total score change from 
the baseline of 4 points or greater (the minimal clinically important difference 
for the SGRQ is 4 points), OR 1.25 (95% CI 1.09 to 1.44, P = 0.002, I2 = 0%, 
moderate quality evidence).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: For the treatment of COPD, LAMA+LABA has fewer 
exacerbations, a larger improvement of FEV1, a lower risk of pneumonia, and more 
frequent improvement in quality of life as measured by an increase over 4 units 
or more of the SGRQ. These data were supported by low or moderate quality 
evidence generated from mainly participants with moderate to severe COPD in 
heterogeneous trials with an observation period of less than one year. Our 
findings support the recently updated GOLD guidance.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012066.pub2
PMCID: PMC6464543
PMID: 28185242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TK: received grants or lecture fees (or both) 
from GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer, Meiji, AstraZeneca, and 
Novartis from 2013 to 2016. This review was not funded by any pharmaceutical 
companies. HN, GA, SY, OE, NK, and NK: none known.


7. Lancet. 2018 Mar 17;391(10125):1076-1084. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30206-X. 
Epub 2018 Feb 9.

Extrafine inhaled triple therapy versus dual bronchodilator therapy in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (TRIBUTE): a double-blind, parallel group, 
randomised controlled trial.

Papi A(1), Vestbo J(2), Fabbri L(3), Corradi M(4), Prunier H(5), Cohuet G(5), 
Guasconi A(5), Montagna I(5), Vezzoli S(5), Petruzzelli S(5), Scuri M(5), Roche 
N(6), Singh D(7).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre on Asthma and COPD, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. 
Electronic address: ppa@unife.it.
(2)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine and Manchester 
University NHS Foundation Trust, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy; COPD Center, 
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Italy.
(5)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.
(6)Hôpital Cochin (APHP), Université Paris-Descartes (EA2511), Service de 
Pneumologie et Soins Intensifs Respiratoires, Paris, France.
(7)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine and Manchester 
University NHS Foundation Trust, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; 
Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester, UK.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2018 Feb 26;:

Comment in
    Lancet. 2018 Mar 17;391(10125):1003-1004.
    Lancet. 2018 Mar 17;391(10125):1004-1006.
    Lancet. 2018 Sep 29;392(10153):1112.
    Lancet. 2018 Sep 29;392(10153):1112-1113.
    Lancet. 2018 Sep 29;392(10153):1112.

BACKGROUND: Evidence is scarce on the relative risk-benefit of inhaled triple 
therapy, consisting of inhaled corticosteroid, long acting muscarinic 
antagonist, and long-acting beta-agonist, versus dual bronchodilation for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We aimed to compare a single-inhaler 
triple combination of beclometasone dipropionate, formoterol fumarate, and 
glycopyrronium (BDP/FF/G) versus a single-inhaler dual bronchodilator 
combination of indacaterol plus glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) in terms of the rate of 
moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbations over 52 weeks of treatment.
METHODS: This randomised, parallel-group, double-blind, double-dummy study was 
done at 187 sites across 17 countries. Eligible patients had symptomatic COPD, 
severe or very severe airflow limitation, at least one moderate or severe 
exacerbation in the previous year, and were receiving inhaled maintenance 
medication. After a 2 week run-in period with one inhalation per day of IND/GLY 
(85 μg/43 μg), patients were randomly assigned (1:1), via an interactive 
response technology system, to receive 52 weeks of treatment with two 
inhalations of extrafine BDP/FF/G (87 μg/5 μg/9 μg) twice per day or one 
inhalation of IND/GLY (85 μg/43 μg) per day. Randomisation was stratified by 
country and severity of airflow limitation. The primary endpoint was the rate of 
moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbations across 52 weeks of treatment in all 
randomised patients who received at least one dose of study drug and had at 
least one post-baseline efficacy assessment. Safety was assessed in all patients 
who received at least one dose of study drug. This study is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02579850.
FINDINGS: Between May, 29 2015, and July 10, 2017, 1532 patients received 
BDP/FF/G (n=764) or IND/GLY (n=768). Moderate-to-severe exacerbation rates were 
0·50 per patient per year (95% CI 0·45-0·57) for BDP/FF/G and 0·59 per patient 
per year (0·53-0·67) for IND/GLY, giving a rate ratio of 0·848 (0·723-0·995, 
p=0·043) in favour of BDP/FF/G. Adverse events were reported by 490 (64%) of 764 
patients receiving BDP/FF/G and 516 (67%) of 768 patients receiving IND/GLY. 
Pneumonia occurred in 28 (4%) patients receiving BDP/FF/G versus 27 (4%) 
patients receiving IND/GLY. One treatment-related serious adverse event occurred 
in each group: dysuria in a patient receiving BDP/FF/G and atrial fibrillation 
in a patient receiving IND/GLY.
INTERPRETATION: In patients with symptomatic COPD, severe or very severe airflow 
limitation, and an exacerbation history despite maintenance therapy, extrafine 
BDP/FF/G significantly reduced the rate of moderate-to-severe exacerbations 
compared with IND/GLY, without increasing the risk of pneumonia.
FUNDING: Chiesi Farmaceutici.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30206-X
PMID: 29429593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 May 1;197(9):1136-1146. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201709-1807OC.

Intensified Therapy with Inhaled Corticosteroids and Long-Acting β(2)-Agonists 
at the Onset of Upper Respiratory Tract Infection to Prevent Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease Exacerbations. A Multicenter, Randomized, Double-Blind, 
Placebo-controlled Trial.

Stolz D(1)(2)(3), Hirsch HH(4)(2)(3)(5), Schilter D(6), Louis R(7), Rakic 
J(1)(2)(3), Boeck L(1)(2)(3), Papakonstantinou E(1)(2)(3), Schindler C(3)(8), 
Grize L(3)(8), Tamm M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)1 Clinic of Respiratory Medicine and Pulmonary Cell Research, and.
(2)2 Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)3 University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)5 Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, University 
Hospital Basel, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)4 Transplantation and Clinical Virology, Department of Biomedicine, 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)6 Lindenhof Hospital, Bern, Switzerland.
(7)7 Pneumology Department, GIGA I3 research group, University of Liege, CHU 
Liege, Belgium; and.
(8)8 Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 May 1;197(9):1096-1098.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Oct 15;198(8):1102-1103.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Oct 15;198(8):1103-1105.

RATIONALE: The efficacy of intensified combination therapy with inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting beta-agonists (LABA) at the onset of upper 
respiratory tract infection (URTI) symptoms in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate whether intensified combination therapy with ICS/LABA, 
at the onset of URTI symptoms, decreases the incidence of COPD exacerbation 
occurring within 21 days of the URTI.
METHODS: A total of 450 patients with stable, moderate to very severe COPD, were 
included in this investigator-initiated and -driven, double-blind, randomized, 
placebo-controlled study. At inclusion, patients were assigned to open-labeled 
low-maintenance dose ICS/LABA. Each patient was randomized either to 
intensified-dose ICS/LABA or placebo and instructed to start using this 
medication only in case of a URTI, at the onset of symptoms, twice daily, for 10 
days.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The incidence of any exacerbation following a 
URTI was not significantly decreased in the ICS/LABA group, as compared with 
placebo (14.6% vs. 16.2%; hazard ratio, 0.77; 95% confidence interval, 
0.46-1.33; P = 0.321) but the risk of severe exacerbation was decreased by 72% 
(hazard ratio, 0.28; 95% confidence interval, 0.11-0.74%; P = 0.010). In the 
stratified analysis, effect size was modified by disease severity, fractional 
exhaled nitric oxide, and the body mass index-airflow obstruction-dyspnea, and 
exercise score. Compared with the stable period, evidence of at least one virus 
was significantly more common at URTI, 10 days after URTI, and at exacerbation.
CONCLUSIONS: Intensified combination therapy with ICS/LABA for 10 days at URTI 
onset did not decrease the incidence of any COPD exacerbation but prevented 
severe exacerbation. Patients with more severe disease had a significant risk 
reduction for any exacerbation. Clinical trial registered with www.isrctn.com 
(ISRCTN45572998).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201709-1807OC
PMID: 29266965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2018 Feb;48:71-79. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.10.003. Epub 
2017 Oct 4.

Pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics and safety of revefenacin (TD-4208), a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist, in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD): Results of two randomized, double-blind, phase 2 
studies.

Quinn D(1), Barnes CN(2), Yates W(3), Bourdet DL(4), Moran EJ(5), Potgieter 
P(6), Nicholls A(7), Haumann B(8), Singh D(9).

Author information:
(1)P3 Research, 121 Adelaide Road, Mount Cook, Wellington, New Zealand. 
Electronic address: dean@p3research.co.nz.
(2)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States. 
Electronic address: cbarnes@theravance.com.
(3)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States. 
Electronic address: wyates@theravance.com.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States. 
Electronic address: dbourdet@theravance.com.
(5)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States. 
Electronic address: emoran@theravance.com.
(6)Theravance Biopharma UK, Limited, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
peterpotgieter2@aol.com.
(7)Pharmaceutical Consulting, Burlingame, CA, United States. Electronic address: 
andrew.10.nicholls@gmail.com.
(8)Theravance Biopharma UK, Limited, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
bhaumann@theravance.com.
(9)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of 
South Manchester, NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: dsingh@meu.org.uk.

BACKGROUND: Revefenacin (TD-4208) is a potent, lung-selective, long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist currently in development as a once-daily nebulized therapy 
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We evaluated the 
pharmacodynamics (bronchodilator activity), pharmacokinetics (PK) and safety of 
single- and multiple-dose administrations of revefenacin in two clinical trials 
(Study 0059 and Study 0091) in patients with moderate to severe COPD.
METHODS: In Study 0059, 32 patients were randomized to receive a single dose of 
revefenacin (350 or 700 μg), active control ipratropium (500 μg) or placebo 
inhalation solution administered via standard jet nebulizer in a double-blind, 
crossover fashion. In Study 0091, 59 patients were randomized to receive 
once-daily inhalations of revefenacin (22, 44, 88, 175, 350 or 700 μg) or 
placebo for 7 days in a double-blind, incomplete block, five-way crossover 
design. The primary efficacy endpoint was change from baseline in peak (0-6 h) 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) in Study 0059, and trough FEV1 after the 
final dose (Day 7) in Study 0091. In both studies, secondary endpoints included 
area under the FEV1-time curve (FEV1 AUC) values from time 12-24 h post dose and 
FEV1 AUC values from time zero to 24 h post dose.
RESULTS: Revefenacin demonstrated a rapid onset and sustained duration of 
bronchodilator action in both studies. In Study 0059, mean peak FEV1 was 
significantly higher (p < 0.001) for revefenacin and ipratropium compared to 
placebo, with differences of 176.8 mL for 350 μg revefenacin, 162.2 mL for 
700 μg revefenacin and 190.6 mL for ipratropium. In Study 0091, mean trough FEV1 
on Day 7 was significantly higher (p < 0.006) for all revefenacin doses compared 
to placebo, with differences ranging from 53.5 mL (22 μg dose) to 114.2 mL 
(175 μg dose). The results for the other spirometry endpoints were consistent 
with the primary endpoint for each study, demonstrating that the bronchodilator 
effect of revefenacin lasted more than 24 h following nebulized administration. 
Revefenacin was rapidly absorbed and extensively metabolized, followed by a slow 
apparent terminal elimination and minimal accumulation with repeated dosing. In 
both studies, adverse events were generally mild and occurred with similar 
frequencies in all groups, with no indication of significant systemic 
anti-muscarinic activity at any dose.
CONCLUSIONS: Following single or multiple nebulized-dose administration in 
patients with COPD, revefenacin demonstrates a rapid onset and sustained 
duration of bronchodilator effect over 24 h following once-daily administration, 
with a PK profile that is commensurate with low systemic exposure.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.10.003
PMID: 28987804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Dec 12;13:3971-3981. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S185975. eCollection 2018.

Triple therapy (ICS/LABA/LAMA) in COPD: time for a reappraisal.

Vanfleteren L(1)(2)(3), Fabbri LM(1)(4), Papi A(4), Petruzzelli S(5), Celli 
B(6).

Author information:
(1)COPD Center, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, lowie.vanfleteren@vgregion.se.
(2)CIRO, Horn, the Netherlands, lowie.vanfleteren@vgregion.se.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Hospital, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands, lowie.vanfleteren@vgregion.se.
(4)Section of Cardiorespiratory and Internal Medicine, Department of Medical 
Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(5)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Recently, two "fixed triple" single-inhaler combinations of an inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS), a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), and a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) have become available for patients with COPD. This 
review presents the clinical evidence that led to the approval of these triple 
therapies, discusses the role of ICS in patients with COPD, and presents data on 
the relative efficacy of "fixed triple" (ICS/LAMA/LABA) therapy vs LAMA, 
ICS/LABA, and LAMA/LABA combinations, and summarizes studies in which ICS/LABAs 
were combined with LAMAs to form "open triple" combinations. Of the five main 
fixed triple studies completed so far, three evaluated the efficacy and safety 
of an extrafine formulation of beclometasone dipropionate, formoterol fumarate, 
and glycopyrronium; the other two studies evaluated fluticasone furoate, 
vilanterol, and umeclidinium. Overall, compared to LAMA, ICS/LABA, or LAMA/LABA, 
triple therapy decreased the risk of exacerbations and improved lung function 
and health status, with a favorable benefit-to-harm ratio. Furthermore, triple 
therapy showed a promising signal in terms of improved survival. The evidence 
suggests that triple therapy is the most effective treatment in moderate/severe 
symptomatic patients with COPD at risk of exacerbations, with marginal if any 
risk of side effects including pneumonia. Ongoing studies are examining the role 
of triple therapy in less severe symptomatic patients with COPD and asthma-COPD 
overlap.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S185975
PMCID: PMC6296179
PMID: 30587953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure LV reports grants and personal fees 
from AstraZeneca, grants from Philips, and Fisher and Paykel, and personal fees 
from Chiesi, GSK, Pulmonx, Menarini, and Boehringer-Ingelheim, all outside the 
submitted work. LMF reports grants, personal fees, and nonfinancial support from 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Sharp & Dohme, 
Takeda, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Menarini, Laboratori Guidotti, and Almirall, 
personal fees and nonfinancial support from Pearl Therapeutics, Mundipharma, and 
Boston Scientific, personal fees from Kyorin, Bayer, and Zambon, and grants from 
Pfizer, Dompè, Malesci, Alfasigma, and Vree Health Italia, all outside the 
submitted work. AP reports grants, personal fees, nonfinancial support, advisory 
board membership and consultancy work from Chiesi, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Mundipharma, and TEVA, personal fees and nonfinancial 
support from Menarini, Novartis, and Zambon, and grants from Sanofi, all outside 
the submitted work. SP is employed by Chiesi, the sponsor of TRILOGY, TRINITY, 
and TRIBUTE. BC reports grants to the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
from AstraZeneca, and that he is a consultant for GlaxoSmithKline, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Pulmonix, Chiesi, and Menarini, all 
outside the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


11. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Jan 21;(1):CD011721. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011721.pub2.

long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) added to combination long-acting 
beta2-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids (LABA/ICS) versus LABA/ICS for adults 
with asthma.

Kew KM(1), Dahri K.

Author information:
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London, 
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

BACKGROUND: Maintenance treatment with long-acting beta2-agonists and inhaled 
corticosteroids (LABA/ICS) can relieve asthma symptoms and reduce the frequency 
of exacerbations, but there are limited treatment options for people who do not 
gain control on combination LABA/ICS. long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) 
are a class of inhaled drug which have been effective for people with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease and are now becoming available for people with 
asthma to take alongside their LABA/ICS inhaler.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of adding a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) to combination long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) and inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) in adults whose asthma is not well controlled by LABA/ICS.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Review Group 
Specialised Register (CAGR) up to January 2016. We also searched 
ClinicalTrials.gov, the WHO trials portal, and reference lists of other reviews, 
and we contacted trial authors for additional information.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of 
at least 12 weeks' duration. Studies met the inclusion criteria if they compared 
LAMA as an add-on to LABA/ICS versus LABA/ICS alone for adults with asthma. We 
included studies reported as full text, those published as abstract only, and 
unpublished data. Primary outcomes were exacerbations requiring oral 
corticosteroids (OCS), validated measures of asthma control, and serious adverse 
events (including mortality).
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors screened searches and 
independently extracted details on risk of bias and numerical data. We analysed 
dichotomous data as odds ratios (ORs) and continuous data as mean differences 
(MD) using a random-effects model. We rated all outcomes using GRADE.
MAIN RESULTS: We found four double-blind, double-dummy trials comparing LAMA to 
placebo, including 1197 people with asthma taking combination LABA/ICS. One of 
the trials was designed to study glycopyrronium bromide but was withdrawn prior 
to enrolment, and the other three all studied tiotropium bromide (mostly 5 µg 
once daily via Respimat) over 48 to 52 weeks. People in the trials had a mean 
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of 55% of their predicted value, 
indicating severe asthma.People randomised to take tiotropium add-on had fewer 
exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids than those continuing to take 
LABA/ICS alone, but the confidence intervals did not rule out no difference (OR 
0.76, 95% CI 0.57 to 1.02; moderate quality evidence). Over 48 weeks, 328 out of 
1000 people taking their usual LABA/ICS would have to take oral corticosteroids 
for an exacerbation compared with 271 if they took tiotropium as well (95% CI 
218 to 333 per 1000). Analyses comparing the number of exacerbations per patient 
in each group (rate ratio) and the time until first exacerbation (hazard ratio) 
were in keeping with the main result. Quality of life, as measured by the Asthma 
Quality of Life Questionnaire (AQLQ) was no better for those taking tiotropium 
add-on than for those taking LABA/ICS alone when considered in light of the 0.5 
minimal clinically important difference on the scale (MD 0.09, 95% CI - 0.03 to 
0.20), and evidence for whether tiotropium increased or decreased serious 
adverse events in this population was inconsistent (OR 0.60, 95% CI 0.24 to 
1.47; I(2) = 76%).Within the secondary outcomes, exacerbations requiring 
hospital admission were too rare to tell whether tiotropium was beneficial over 
LABA/ICS alone. There was high quality evidence showing benefits to lung 
function (trough FEV1 and forced vital capacity (FVC)) and potentially small 
benefits to asthma control. People taking tiotropium add-on were less likely to 
experience non-serious adverse events.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium add-on may have additional benefits over 
LABA/ICS alone in reducing the need for rescue oral steroids in people with 
severe asthma. The effect was imprecise, and there was no evidence for other 
LAMA preparations. Possible benefits on quality of life were negligible, and 
evidence for the effect on serious adverse events was inconsistent. There are 
likely to be small added benefits for tiotropium Respimat 5 µg daily on lung 
function and asthma control over LABA/ICS alone and fewer non-serious adverse 
events. The benefit of tiotropium add-on on the frequency of hospital admission 
is still unknown, despite year-long trials.Ongoing and future trials should 
clearly describe participants' background medications to help clinicians judge 
how the findings relate to stepwise care. If studies test LAMAs other than 
tiotropium Respimat for asthma, they should be at least six months long and use 
accepted and validated outcomes to allow comparisons of the safety and 
effectiveness between different preparations.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011721.pub2
PMID: 26798035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Ann Pharmacother. 2018 Jun;52(6):562-570. doi: 10.1177/1060028017746697. Epub 
2017 Dec 19.

Long-Acting Bronchodilator Use in the Management of Stable COPD.

Abukwaik AW(1), Mansukhani R(2)(3), Bridgeman MB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.
(2)2 Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New 
Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
(3)3 Morristown Medical Center, NJ, USA.

Erratum in
    Ann Pharmacother. 2018 Sep;52(9):944.

OBJECTIVE: To review the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), with a focus on updated information regarding the use of long-acting 
bronchodilators in the prevention of exacerbations and outcomes associated with 
this disease.
DATA SOURCES: A literature search of the MEDLINE databases through November 2017 
was conducted. All published articles regarding use of bronchodilator therapy in 
the management of COPD were evaluated. References of selected articles, data 
from poster presentations, and abstract publications were additionally reviewed.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Available English-language data from 
reviews, abstracts, presentations, and clinical trials of the treatment of 
stable COPD with bronchodilator therapy in humans were reviewed; relevant 
clinical data were selected and included.
DATA SYNTHESIS: COPD is a prevalent medical condition worldwide that results in 
functional impairment, and worsened quality of life and overall health status. 
Numerous treatment options are available; the rationale for the optimal agents 
to utilize in a particular patient case is dependent on a multitude of 
patient-specific factors and severity of disease. In this review, a discussion 
of the role of long-acting bronchodilators, including long-acting β agonists and 
long acting muscarinic antagonists will be explored. Additionally, an update on 
the roles of novel delivery devices for delivering respiratory medications in 
this medical condition will be described.
CONCLUSION: Although numerous treatment options are available, management of 
COPD remains a clinical challenge. Long-acting bronchodilators represent a 
significant class of medications that have the potential to reduce exacerbations 
and related hospitalizations and improve overall health outcomes.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028017746697
PMID: 29258327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Lancet. 2017 May 13;389(10082):1919-1929. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30188-5. 
Epub 2017 Apr 3.

Single inhaler extrafine triple therapy versus long acting muscarinic antagonist 
therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (TRINITY): a double-blind, 
parallel group, randomised controlled trial.

Vestbo J(1), Papi A(2), Corradi M(3), Blazhko V(4), Montagna I(5), Francisco 
C(6), Cohuet G(6), Vezzoli S(5), Scuri M(5), Singh D(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK; University Hospital South Manchester NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, UK; Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester, UK. Electronic 
address: jorgen.vestbo@manchester.ac.uk.
(2)Research Centre on Asthma and COPD, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, 
Italy.
(4)Pulmonology Department No 2, Kharkiv City Clinical Hospital No 13, Kharkiv, 
Ukraine.
(5)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.
(6)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi SAS, Courbevoie, France.
(7)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK; University Hospital South Manchester NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, UK; Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2017 May 13;389(10082):1864-1865.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2017 Jul;5(7):e25.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2017 Jul;5(7):e26.

BACKGROUND: Limited data are available for the efficacy of triple therapy with 
two long-acting bronchodilators and an inhaled corticosteroid in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We compared treatment with extrafine 
beclometasone dipropionate, formoterol fumarate, and glycopyrronium bromide 
(BDP/FF/GB; fixed triple) with tiotropium, and BDP/FF plus tiotropium (open 
triple).
METHODS: For this double-blind, parallel-group, randomised, controlled trial, 
eligible patients had COPD, post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s 
(FEV1) of less than 50%, at least one moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbation in 
the previous 12 months, and a COPD Assessment Test total score of at least 10. 
After a 2-week run-in period receiving one inhalation per day via single-dose 
dry-powder inhaler of open-label 18 μg tiotropium, patients were randomised 
(2:2:1) using a interactive response technology system to 52 weeks treatment 
with tiotropium, fixed triple, or open triple. Randomisation was stratified by 
country and severity of airflow limitation. The primary endpoint was 
moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbation rate. The key secondary endpoint was change 
from baseline in pre-dose FEV1 at week 52. The trial is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01911364.
FINDINGS: Between Jan 21, 2014, and March 18, 2016, 2691 patients received fixed 
triple (n=1078), tiotropium (n=1075), or open triple (n=538). Moderate-to-severe 
exacerbation rates were 0·46 (95% CI 0·41-0·51) for fixed triple, 0·57 
(0·52-0·63) for tiotropium, and 0·45 (0·39-0·52) for open triple; fixed triple 
was superior to tiotropium (rate ratio 0·80 [95% CI 0·69-0·92]; p=0·0025). For 
week 52 pre-dose FEV1, fixed triple was superior to tiotropium (mean difference 
0·061 L [0·037 to 0·086]; p<0·0001) and non-inferior to open triple (-0·003L 
[-0·033 to 0·027]; p=0·85). Adverse events were reported by 594 (55%) patients 
with fixed triple, 622 (58%) with tiotropium, and 309 (58%) with open triple.
INTERPRETATION: In our TRINITY study, treatment with extrafine fixed triple 
therapy had clinical benefits compared with tiotropium in patients with 
symptomatic COPD, FEV1 of less than 50%, and a history of exacerbations.
FUNDING: Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30188-5
PMID: 28385353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. COPD. 2017 Feb;14(1):105-112. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1202912. Epub 2016 Oct 
12.

Inhaled long acting beta agonistss and Urinary Tract Infection in Individuals 
with COPD.

Gershon AS(1)(2)(3)(4), Newman AM(2), Fischer HD(2), Austin PC(2)(4), Daneman 
N(1)(2)(3), Bell CM(2)(3)(4)(5), Stephenson AL(3)(6), Gill SS(2)(7), Vozoris 
NT(3)(6), Rochon PA(2)(3)(4)(8).

Author information:
(1)a Sunnybrook Research Institute, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre , Toronto 
, Ontario , Canada.
(2)b Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences , Toronto , Ontario , Canada.
(3)c Department of Medicine , Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto , 
Toronto , Ontario , Canada.
(4)d Institute of Health Policy, Management, and Evaluation, University of 
Toronto , Toronto , Ontario , Canada.
(5)e Department of Medicine , Mount Sinai Hospital , Toronto , Ontario , Canada.
(6)f Division of Respirology , Department of Medicine, St Michael's Hospital , 
Toronto , Ontario , Canada.
(7)g Department of Medicine , Queen's University , Kingston , Ontario , Canada.
(8)h Women's College Research Institute, Women's College Hospital , Toronto , 
Ontario , Canada.

Inhaled, long acting beta agonists medication (LAA), commonly used for 
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), has been shown 
to decrease COPD hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and acute 
exacerbations but has also been associated with urinary tract infection (UTI) in 
a prior meta-analysis. The objective of this study was to verify if there was an 
association between LAA and UTI in older individuals with COPD. A 
population-based, real-world cohort study using health administrative data from 
Ontario, Canada was conducted. Incidence of UTI was compared between older 
people with physician-diagnosed COPD, who were new users of inhaled long-acting 
anticholinergics and new users of inhaled corticosteroids-a reference medication 
used in similar clinical settings that has no known association with UTI. 
Propensity score matching was used to minimize the effects of confounding. An 
overall association between LAA and various measures of UTI in older individuals 
was not found. However, in a priori defined stratified analyses, men newly 
initiated on LAA were 75% more likely to develop a UTI than men newly started on 
an inhaled corticosteroid (hazard ratio 1.75; 95% confidence interval 
1.05-2.92). No significant association was seen in women. In conclusion, older 
men with COPD newly started on LAA are at increased risk of UTI. Men considering 
an inhaled LAA should be informed of this risk and, if they decide to take it, 
be provided with appropriate monitoring.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1202912
PMID: 27732117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Nov 16;10:2495-517. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S92412. eCollection 2015.

Comparative efficacy of long acting muscarinic antagonist monotherapies in COPD: 
a systematic review and network meta-analysis.

Ismaila AS(1), Huisman EL(2), Punekar YS(3), Karabis A(2).

Author information:
(1)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA 
; Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, 
Canada.
(2)Real World Strategy and Analytics, Mapi Group, Houten, the Netherlands.
(3)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: Randomized, controlled trials comparing long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) efficacy in COPD are limited. This network meta-analysis (NMA) 
assessed the relative efficacy of tiotropium 18 µg once-daily (OD) and newer 
agents (aclidinium 400 µg twice-daily, glycopyrronium 50 µg OD, and umeclidinium 
62.5 µg OD).
METHODS: A systematic literature review identified randomized, controlled trials 
of adult COPD patients receiving LAMAs. A NMA within a Bayesian framework 
examined change from baseline in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
(FEV1), transitional dyspnea index focal score, St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire score, and rescue medication use.
RESULTS: Twenty-four studies (n=21,311) compared LAMAs with placebo/each other. 
Aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium, and umeclidinium, respectively, 
demonstrated favorable results versus placebo, for change from baseline (95% 
credible interval) in 12-week trough FEV1 (primary endpoint: 101.40 mL 
[77.06-125.60]; 117.20 mL [104.50-129.90]; 114.10 mL [103.10-125.20]; 136.70 mL 
[104.20-169.20]); 24-week trough FEV1 (128.10 mL [84.10-172.00]; 135.80 mL 
[123.10-148.30]; 106.40 mL [95.45-117.30]; 115.00 mL [74.51-155.30]); 24-week St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire score (-4.60 [-6.76 to -2.54]; -3.14 [-3.83 
to -2.45]; -2.43 [-2.92 to -1.93]; -4.69 [-7.05 to -2.31]); 24-week transitional 
dyspnea index score (1.00 [0.41-1.59]; 1.01 [0.79-1.22]; 0.82 [0.62-1.02]; 1.00 
[0.49-1.51]); and 24-week rescue medication use (data not available; -0.41 
puffs/day [-0.62 to -0.20]; -0.52 puffs/day [-0.74 to -0.30]; -0.30 puffs/day 
[-0.81 to 0.21]). For 12-week trough FEV1, differences in change from baseline 
(95% credible interval) were -12.8 mL (-39.39 to 13.93), aclidinium versus 
tiotropium; 3.08 mL (-7.58 to 13.69), glycopyrronium versus tiotropium; 22.58 mL 
(-11.58 to 56.97), umeclidinium versus tiotropium; 15.90 mL (-11.60 to 43.15), 
glycopyrronium versus aclidinium; 35.40 mL (-5.06 to 76.07), umeclidinium versus 
aclidinium; and 19.50 mL (-15.30 to 54.38), umeclidinium versus glycopyrronium. 
Limitations included inhaler-related factors and safety; longer-term outcomes 
were not considered.
CONCLUSION: The new LAMAs studied had at least comparable efficacy to 
tiotropium, the established class standard. Choice should depend on physician's 
and patient's preference.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S92412
PMCID: PMC4655912
PMID: 26604738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMJ. 2018 Nov 6;363:k4388. doi: 10.1136/bmj.k4388.

Triple therapy in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zheng Y(1), Zhu J(2), Liu Y(3), Lai W(4), Lin C(4), Qiu K(2), Wu J(2), Yao W(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Physiological Sciences and Department of Pharmacy of the 
Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University, Guangdong Medical 
University, Zhanjiang, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Guangdong Medical University, Zhanjiang, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical 
University, Guangdong Medical University, No 57, South of Renmin Avenue, 
Zhanjiang 524001, China.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical 
University, Guangdong Medical University, No 57, South of Renmin Avenue, 
Zhanjiang 524001, China yaoweimin2014@yeah.net.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the rate of moderate to severe exacerbations between 
triple therapy and dual therapy or monotherapy in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed, Embase, Cochrane databases, and clinical trial registries 
searched from inception to April 2018.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials comparing triple therapy with 
dual therapy or monotherapy in patients with COPD were eligible. Efficacy and 
safety outcomes of interest were also available.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Data were collected independently. Meta-analyses 
were conducted to calculate rate ratios, hazard ratios, risk ratios, and mean 
differences with 95% confidence intervals. Quality of evidence was summarised in 
accordance with GRADE methodology (grading of recommendations assessment, 
development, and evaluation).
RESULTS: 21 trials (19 publications) were included. Triple therapy consisted of 
a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), long acting β agonist (LABA), and 
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS). Triple therapy was associated with a significantly 
reduced rate of moderate or severe exacerbations compared with LAMA monotherapy 
(rate ratio 0.71, 95% confidence interval 0.60 to 0.85), LAMA and LABA (0.78, 
0.70 to 0.88), and ICS and LABA (0.77, 0.66 to 0.91). Trough forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) and quality of life were favourable with triple 
therapy. The overall safety profile of triple therapy is reassuring, but 
pneumonia was significantly higher with triple therapy than with dual therapy of 
LAMA and LABA (relative risk 1.53, 95% confidence interval 1.25 to 1.87).
CONCLUSIONS: Use of triple therapy resulted in a lower rate of moderate or 
severe exacerbations of COPD, better lung function, and better health related 
quality of life than dual therapy or monotherapy in patients with advanced COPD.
STUDY REGISTRATION: Prospero CRD42018077033.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.k4388
PMCID: PMC6218838
PMID: 30401700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available 
on request from the corresponding author) and declare: no support from any 
organisation for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous 
three years; no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.


17. Chest. 2017 Jan;151(1):60-67. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.08.001. Epub 2016 Aug 
20.

Long-Acting Bronchodilator Initiation in COPD and the Risk of Adverse 
Cardiopulmonary Events: A Population-Based Comparative Safety Study.

Suissa S(1), Dell'Aniello S(2), Ernst P(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute - Jewish General 
Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. Electronic address: 
samy.suissa@mcgill.ca.
(2)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute - Jewish General 
Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute - Jewish General 
Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators, including long-acting beta2-agonists 
(LABA) and the anticholinergic tiotropium, are recommended as initial 
maintenance therapy in COPD. Studies to date have been limited in size and 
reported ambivalent results on the comparative risk of cardiovascular, 
cerebrovascular, and pulmonary adverse events between these two long-acting 
bronchodilators. Moreover, little information is available for the period when 
treatment is first initiated, a time when subjects may be especially at risk.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of new users of long-acting bronchodilators 
between 2002 and 2012, age 55 or older, from the United Kingdom's Clinical 
Practice Research Datalink. Patients initiating tiotropium were matched on 
high-dimensional propensity scores and prior inhaled corticosteroid use with 
patients initiating LABAs, and followed for 1 year for the occurrence of acute 
myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, arrhythmia, and pneumonia.
RESULTS: A total of 26,442 tiotropium initiators were matched to 26,442 LABA 
initiators, mainly single inhalers combined with inhaled corticosteroids. The 
hazard ratio of acute myocardial infarction associated with tiotropium 
initiation, relative to LABA initiation, was 1.10 (95% CI, 0.88-1.38), whereas 
for stroke it was 1.02 (95% CI, 0.78-1.34), for arrhythmia 0.81 (95% CI, 
0.60-1.09), and heart failure 0.90 (95% CI, 0.79-1.02). The incidence of 
pneumonia was significantly less with tiotropium (hazard ratio, 0.81; 95% CI, 
0.72-0.92).
CONCLUSION: COPD treatment initiation with tiotropium compared with LABA does 
not increase cardiovascular risk in the first year of treatment. The risk of 
pneumonia is higher with LABA, a likely effect of the inhaled corticosteroids 
present in many LABA inhalers used in real world clinical practice.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.08.001
PMID: 27554300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. BMJ Open. 2015 Oct 26;5(10):e009183. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183.

Comparative safety and effectiveness of long-acting inhaled agents for treating 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and network 
meta-analysis.

Tricco AC(1), Strifler L(2), Veroniki AA(2), Yazdi F(3), Khan PA(2), Scott A(2), 
Ng C(2), Antony J(2), Mrklas K(4), D'Souza J(2), Cardoso R(2), Straus SE(5).

Author information:
(1)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Epidemiology Division, Dalla Lana School of 
Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Center for Practice Changing Research 
Building, The Ottawa Hospital-General Campus, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Alberta Health Services, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.
(5)Knowledge Translation Program, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Department of Geriatric Medicine, University 
of Toronto, 27 Kings College Circle, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Erratum in
    BMJ Open. 2019 May 1;9(4):e009183corr1.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the safety and effectiveness of long-acting β-antagonists 
(LABA), long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA) and inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS) for managing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
SETTING: Systematic review and network meta-analysis (NMA).
PARTICIPANTS: 208 randomised clinical trials (RCTs) including 134,692 adults 
with COPD.
INTERVENTIONS: LABA, LAMA and/or ICS, alone or in combination, versus each other 
or placebo.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOMES: The proportion of patients with 
moderate-to-severe exacerbations. The number of patients experiencing mortality, 
pneumonia, serious arrhythmia and cardiovascular-related mortality (CVM) were 
secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: NMA was conducted including 20 RCTs for moderate-to-severe 
exacerbations for 26,141 patients with an exacerbation in the past year. 32 
treatments were effective versus placebo including: tiotropium, 
budesonide/formoterol, salmeterol, indacaterol, fluticasone/salmeterol, 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium, tiotropium/fluticasone/salmeterol and 
tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol. Tiotropium/budesonide/formoterol was most 
effective (99.2% probability of being the most effective according to the 
Surface Under the Cumulative RAnking (SUCRA) curve). NMA was conducted on 
mortality (88 RCTs, 97 526 patients); fluticasone/salmeterol was more effective 
in reducing mortality than placebo, formoterol and fluticasone alone, and was 
the most effective (SUCRA=71%). NMA was conducted on CVM (37 RCTs, 55,156 
patients) and the following were safest: salmeterol versus each OF placebo, 
tiotropium and tiotropium (Soft Mist Inhaler (SMR)); fluticasone versus 
tiotropium (SMR); and salmeterol/fluticasone versus tiotropium and tiotropium 
(SMR). Triamcinolone acetonide was the most harmful (SUCRA=81%). NMA was 
conducted on pneumonia occurrence (54 RCTs, 61 551 patients). 24 treatments were 
more harmful, including 2 that increased risk of pneumonia versus placebo; 
fluticasone and fluticasone/salmeterol. The most harmful agent was 
fluticasone/salmeterol (SUCRA=89%). NMA was conducted for arrhythmia; no 
statistically significant differences between agents were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Many inhaled agents are available for COPD, some are safer and more 
effective than others. Our results can be used by patients and physicians to 
tailor administration of these agents.
PROTOCOL REGISTRATION NUMBER: PROSPERO # CRD42013006725.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009183
PMCID: PMC4636655
PMID: 26503392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Oct 6;12:2917-2928. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S146822. eCollection 2017.

Triple therapy in COPD: new evidence with the extrafine fixed combination of 
beclomethasone dipropionate, formoterol fumarate, and glycopyrronium bromide.

Singh D(1), Corradi M(2), Spinola M(3), Papi A(4), Usmani OS(5), Scuri M(3), 
Petruzzelli S(3), Vestbo J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, Research Centre on Asthma and COPD, 
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(5)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.

The goals of COPD therapy are to prevent and control symptoms, reduce the 
frequency and severity of exacerbations, and improve exercise tolerance. The 
triple combination therapy of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs), long-acting beta2 
agonists (LABAs), and long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) has become an 
option for maintenance treatment of COPD and as a "step-up" therapy from single 
or double combination treatments. There is evidence that triple combination 
ICS/LABA/LAMA with different inhalers improves lung function, symptoms, and 
health status and reduces exacerbations. A new triple fixed-dose combination of 
extrafine beclomethasone dipropionate (100 µg/puff)/formoterol fumarate (6 
µg/puff)/glycopyrronium bromide (12.5 µg/puff) has been developed as a 
hydrofluoroalkane pressurized metered dose inhaler. Two large pivotal studies 
showed that this extrafine fixed ICS/LABA/LAMA triple combination is superior to 
fixed ICS/LABA combined therapy and also superior to the LAMA tiotropium in 
terms of lung function and exacerbation prevention in COPD patients at risk of 
exacerbation. This review considers the new information provided by these 
clinical trials of extrafine triple therapy and the implications for the 
clinical management of COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S146822
PMCID: PMC5638574
PMID: 29062229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure DS reports grants and personal fees 
from Almirall, Astra-Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Glenmark, Johnson and Johnson, Merck, NAPP, Novartis, Pfizer, Takeda, Teva, 
Theravance, and Verona and personal fees from Genentech and Skyepharma. OSU has 
received industry-academic funding from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Edmond 
Pharma, GlaxoSmithKline, Mundipharma International and has received consultancy 
or speaker fees from Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, Edmond 
Pharma, GlaxoSmithKline, Napp, Novartis, Mundipharma International, Pearl 
Therapeutics, Roche, Sandoz, Takeda, UCB, Vectura and Zentiva. JV has received 
honoraria for consulting and presenting from AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis. AP reports grants, personal fees, 
non-financial support, and others from Chiesi, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmith-Kline, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Pfizer, Takeda, Mundipharma and TEVA, 
personal fees and non-financial support from Menarini, Novartis and Zambon, and 
grants from Sanofi. MC received honoraria for consultancy from Chiesi 
Farmaceutici SpA. MSp, SP, and MSc are full-time employees of Chiesi 
Farmaceutici SpA. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


20. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2017;237:41-62. doi: 10.1007/164_2016_68.

Muscarinic Receptor Antagonists.

Matera MG(1), Cazzola M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Pharmacology, Second University 
of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Tor Vergata, Rome, 
Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.

Parasympathetic activity is increased in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma and appears to be the major reversible 
component of airway obstruction. Therefore, treatment with muscarinic receptor 
antagonists is an effective bronchodilator therapy in COPD and also in asthmatic 
patients. In recent years, the accumulating evidence that the cholinergic system 
controls not only contraction by airway smooth muscle but also the functions of 
inflammatory cells and airway epithelial cells has suggested that muscarinic 
receptor antagonists could exert other effects that may be of clinical relevance 
when we must treat a patient suffering from COPD or asthma. There are currently 
six muscarinic receptor antagonists licenced for use in the treatment of COPD, 
the short-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (SAMAs) ipratropium bromide and 
oxitropium bromide and the long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMAs) 
aclidinium bromide, tiotropium bromide, glycopyrronium bromide and umeclidinium 
bromide. Concerns have been raised about possible associations of muscarinic 
receptor antagonists with cardiovascular safety, but the most advanced compounds 
seem to have an improved safety profile. Further beneficial effects of SAMAs and 
LAMAs are seen when added to existing treatments, including LABAs, inhaled 
corticosteroids and phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors. The importance of tiotropium 
bromide in the maintenance treatment of COPD, and likely in asthma, has spurred 
further research to identify new LAMAs. There are a number of molecules that are 
being identified, but only few have reached the clinical development.

DOI: 10.1007/164_2016_68
PMID: 27787709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Oct 9;13:3203-3231. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S173472. eCollection 2018.

Comparative efficacy of inhaled medications (ICS/LABA, LAMA, LAMA/LABA and SAMA) 
for COPD: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.

Aziz MIA(1), Tan LE(1), Wu DB(1), Pearce F(1), Chua GSW(2), Lin L(1), Tan PT(1), 
Ng K(1).

Author information:
(1)Agency for Care Effectiveness, Ministry of Health, Singapore, 
ng_kwong_hoe@moh.gov.sg.
(2)Division of Medicine, Ng Teng Fong General Hospital, Singapore.

PURPOSE: To assess the comparative efficacy of short-acting muscarinic 
antagonists (SAMAs), long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), LAMA in 
combination with long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs; LAMA/LABAs) and inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) in combination with LABA (ICS/LABAs) for the maintenance 
treatment of COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We systematically reviewed 74 randomized controlled 
trials (74,832 participants) published up to 15 November 2017, which compared 
any of the interventions (SAMA [ipratropium], LAMA [aclidinium, glycopyrronium, 
tiotropium, umeclidinium], LAMA/LABA [aclidinium/formoterol, 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium, tiotropium/olodaterol, umeclidinium/vilanterol] and 
ICS/LABA [fluticasone/vilanterol, budesonide/formoterol, 
salmeterol/fluticasone]) with each other or with placebo. A random-effects 
network meta-analysis combining direct and indirect evidence was conducted to 
examine the change from baseline in trough FEV1, transition dyspnea index, St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire and frequency of adverse events at weeks 12 
and 24.
RESULTS: Inconsistency models were not statistically significant for all 
outcomes. LAMAs, LAMA/LABAs and ICS/LABAs led to a significantly greater 
improvement in trough FEV1 compared with placebo and SAMA monotherapy at weeks 
12 and 24. All LAMA/LABAs, except aclidinium/formoterol, were statistically 
significantly better than LAMA monotherapy and ICS/LABAs in improving trough 
FEV1. Among the LAMAs, umeclidinium showed statistically significant improvement 
in trough FEV1 at week 12 compared to tiotropium and glycopyrronium, but the 
results were not clinically significant. LAMA/LABAs had the highest 
probabilities of being ranked the best agents in FEV1 improvement. Similar 
trends were observed for the transition dyspnea index and St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire outcomes. There were no significant differences in the 
incidences of adverse events among all treatment options.
CONCLUSION: LAMA/LABA showed the greatest improvement in trough FEV1 at weeks 12 
and 24 compared with the other inhaled drug classes, while SAMA showed the least 
improvement. There were no significant differences among the LAMAs and 
LAMA/LABAs within their respective classes.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S173472
PMCID: PMC6186767
PMID: 30349228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


22. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Mar 6;3(3):CD012930. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD012930.pub2.

Once daily long-acting beta2-agonists and long acting muscarinic antagonists in 
a combined inhaler versus placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Maqsood U(1), Ho TN, Palmer K, Eccles FJ, Munavvar M, Wang R, Crossingham I, 
Evans DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sandwell and West Birmingham Hospitals 
NHS Trust, Birmingham, UK.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD012930.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a respiratory 
condition causing accumulation of mucus in the airways, cough, and 
breathlessness; the disease is progressive and is the fourth most common cause 
of death worldwide. Current treatment strategies for COPD are multi-modal and 
aim to reduce morbidity and mortality and increase patients' quality of life by 
slowing disease progression and preventing exacerbations. Fixed-dose 
combinations (FDCs) of a long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA) plus a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) delivered via a single inhaler are approved by 
regulatory authorities in the USA, Europe, and Japan for the treatment of COPD. 
Several LABA/LAMA FDCs are available and recent meta-analyses have clarified 
their utility versus their mono-components in COPD. Evaluation of the efficacy 
and safety of once-daily LABA/LAMA FDCs versus placebo will facilitate the 
comparison of different FDCs in future network meta-analyses.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed the evidence for once-daily LABA/LAMA combinations 
(delivered in a single inhaler) versus placebo on clinically meaningful outcomes 
in patients with stable COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from Cochrane Airways' Specialised Register 
(CASR) and also conducted a search of the US National Institutes of Health 
Ongoing Trials Register ClinicalTrials.gov (www.clinicaltrials.gov) and the 
World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform 
(apps.who.int/trialsearch). We searched CASR and trial registries from their 
inception to 3 December 2018; we imposed no restriction on language of 
publication.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group and cross-over randomised 
controlled trials (RCTs) comparing once-daily LABA/LAMA FDC versus placebo. We 
included studies reported as full-text, those published as abstract only, and 
unpublished data. We excluded very short-term trials with a duration of less 
than 3 weeks. We included adults (≥ 40 years old) with a diagnosis of stable 
COPD. We included studies that allowed participants to continue using their ICS 
during the trial as long as the ICS was not part of the randomised treatment.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently screened the 
search results to determine included studies, extracted data on prespecified 
outcomes of interest, and assessed the risk of bias of included studies; we 
resolved disagreements by discussion with a third review author. Where possible, 
we used a random-effects model to meta-analyse extracted data. We rated all 
outcomes using the GRADE (Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development and 
Evaluation) system and presented results in 'Summary of findings' tables.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified and included 22 RCTs randomly assigning 8641 people 
with COPD to either once-daily LABA/LAMA FDC (6252 participants) or placebo 
(3819 participants); nine studies had a cross-over design. Studies had a 
duration of between three and 52 weeks (median 12 weeks). The mean age of 
participants across the included studies ranged from 59 to 65 years and in 21 of 
22 studies, participants had GOLD stage II or III COPD. Concomitant inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) use was permitted in all of the included studies (where 
stated); across the included studies, between 28% to 58% of participants were 
using ICS at baseline. Six studies evaluated the once-daily combination of 
IND/GLY (110/50 μg), seven studies evaluated TIO/OLO (2.5/5 or 5/5 μg), eight 
studies evaluated UMEC/VI (62.5/5, 125/25 or 500/25 μg) and one study evaluated 
ACD/FOR (200/6, 200/12 or 200/18 μg); all LABA/LAMA combinations were compared 
with placebo.The risk of bias was generally considered to be low or unknown 
(insufficient detail provided), with only one study per domain considered to 
have a high risk of bias except for the domain 'other bias' which was determined 
to be at high risk of bias in four studies (in three studies, disease severity 
was greater at baseline in participants receiving LABA/LAMA compared with 
participants receiving placebo, which would be expected to shift the treatment 
effect in favour of placebo).Compared to the placebo, the pooled results for the 
primary outcomes for the once-daily LABA/LAMA arm were as follows: all-cause 
mortality, OR 1.88 (95% CI 0.81 to 4.36, low-certainty evidence); all-cause 
serious adverse events (SAEs), OR 1.06 (95% CI 0.88 to 1.28, high-certainty 
evidence); acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD), OR 0.53 (95% CI 0.36 to 0.78, 
moderate-certainty evidence); adjusted St George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) score, MD -4.08 (95% CI -4.80 to -3.36, high-certainty evidence); 
proportion of SGRQ responders, OR 1.75 (95% CI 1.54 to 1.99). Compared with 
placebo, the pooled results for the secondary outcomes for the once-daily 
LABA/LAMA arm were as follows: adjusted trough forced expiratory volume in one 
second (FEV1), MD 0.20 L (95% CI 0.19 to 0.21, moderate-certainty evidence); 
adjusted peak FEV1, MD 0.31 L (95% CI 0.29 to 0.32, moderate-certainty 
evidence); and all-cause AEs, OR 0.95 (95% CI 0.86 to 1.04; high-certainty 
evidence). No studies reported data for the 6-minute walk test. The results were 
generally consistent across subgroups for different LABA/LAMA combinations and 
doses.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, once-daily LABA/LAMA (either 
IND/GLY, UMEC/VI or TIO/OLO) via a combination inhaler is associated with a 
clinically significant improvement in lung function and health-related quality 
of life in patients with mild-to-moderate COPD; UMEC/VI appears to reduce the 
rate of exacerbations in this population. These conclusions are supported by 
moderate or high certainty evidence based on studies with an observation period 
of up to one year.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012930.pub2
PMCID: PMC6402279
PMID: 30839102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: U Maqsood: none known. D Evans: provides 
freelance writing support to medical communications agencies. T Ho: none known. 
K Palmer: none known. F Eccles: none known. Ran Wang: none known. M Munavvar: 
Received honorarium for lectures and to attend the European Respiratory Society 
meeting, in the past, from various companies, including Astra Zeneca, Chiesi, 
GSK, Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Pneumrx. I Crossingham: none known.


23. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016 Sep 1;194(5):559-67. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201607-1349OC.

Effect of Roflumilast and Inhaled Corticosteroid/Long-Acting beta-Agonist on 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Exacerbations (RE(2)SPOND). A Randomized 
Clinical Trial.

Martinez FJ(1), Rabe KF(2)(3)(4), Sethi S(5), Pizzichini E(6), McIvor A(7), 
Anzueto A(8)(9), Alagappan VK(10), Siddiqui S(10), Rekeda L(11), Miller CJ(10), 
Zetterstrand S(12), Reisner C(13), Rennard SI(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)1 Weill Cornell University, New York, New York.
(2)2 LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Großhansdorf, Germany.
(3)3 Department of Medicine of University Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(4)4 Airway Research Center North of the German Center for Lung Research, 
Großhansdorf, Germany.
(5)5 University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, New York.
(6)6 Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Santa Catarina, Brazil.
(7)7 McMaster University, Firestone Institute of Respiratory Health, St. 
Joseph's Healthcare, Ontario, Canada.
(8)8 University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas.
(9)9 South Texas Veterans Health Care System at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas.
(10)10 AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(11)11 Allergan plc, Jersey City, New Jersey.
(12)12 AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(13)13 AstraZeneca, Morristown, New Jersey.
(14)14 University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska; and.
(15)15 AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016 Sep 1;194(5):527-8.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017 May 15;195(10 ):1406-1407.

RATIONALE: Moderate and severe exacerbations are incompletely prevented by 
maximal inhalation therapy in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether roflumilast reduces moderate and/or severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations in patients at risk for 
exacerbations despite treatment with inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting 
beta-agonist with or without a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA).
METHODS: In this 52-week, phase 4, double-blind, placebo-controlled RE(2)SPOND 
(Roflumilast Effect on Exacerbations in Patients on Dual [LABA/ICS] Therapy) 
trial (NCT01443845), participants aged 40 years or older with severe/very severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic bronchitis, two or more 
exacerbations and/or hospitalizations in the previous year, and receiving 
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist with or without LAMA daily for 3 
or more months were equally randomized to once-daily roflumilast, 500 μg 
(n = 1,178), or placebo (n = 1,176). Stratification was based on LAMA use.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Although rate of moderate or severe exacerbations 
per patient per year (primary endpoint) was reduced by 8.5% with roflumilast 
versus placebo, the between-group difference was not statistically significant 
(rate ratio, 0.92; 95% confidence interval, 0.81-1.04; P = 0.163). However, 
roflumilast improved lung function, and in a post hoc analysis roflumilast 
significantly reduced the rate of moderate or severe exacerbations in 
participants with a history of more than three exacerbations and/or one or more 
hospitalizations in the prior year. Adverse event-related discontinuations 
occurred in 11.7% roflumilast-treated and 5.4% placebo-treated participants. 
Deaths occurred in 2.5% roflumilast and 2.1% placebo participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Roflumilast failed to statistically significantly reduce moderate 
and/or severe exacerbations in the overall population. Roflumilast improved lung 
function and reduced exacerbations in participants with frequent exacerbations 
and/or hospitalization history. The safety profile of roflumilast was consistent 
with that of previous studies. Clinical trial registered with 
www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01443845).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201607-1349OC
PMID: 27585384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Apr 7;11:719-30. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S102494. eCollection 2016.

A randomized, blinded study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of umeclidinium 
62.5 μg compared with tiotropium 18 μg in patients with COPD.

Feldman G(1), Maltais F(2), Khindri S(3), Vahdati-Bolouri M(3), Church A(4), 
Fahy WA(3), Trivedi R(5).

Author information:
(1)S. Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Spartanburg, SC, USA.
(2)Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec, Quebec, 
QC, Canada.
(3)GSK, Respiratory Research and Development, Middlesex, UK.
(4)GSK, Respiratory and Immuno-Inflammation Research, Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(5)GSK, Respiratory and Immuno-Inflammation Research, Triangle Park, NC, USA; 
Pearl Therapeutics Inc., Durham, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: The long acting muscarinic antagonists umeclidinium (UMEC) and 
tiotropium (TIO) are approved once-daily maintenance therapies for COPD. This 
study investigated the efficacy and safety of UMEC versus TIO in COPD.
METHODS: This was a 12-week, multicenter, randomized, blinded, double-dummy, 
parallel-group, non-inferiority study. Patients were randomized 1:1 to UMEC 62.5 
μg plus placebo or TIO 18 μg plus placebo. The primary end point was trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at day 85 (non-inferiority margin 
-50 mL; per-protocol [PP] population). Other end points included weighted mean 
FEV1 over 0-24 and 12-24 hours post-dose. Patient-reported outcomes comprised 
Transition Dyspnea Index score, St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total 
score, and COPD Assessment Test score. Adverse events were also assessed.
RESULTS: In total, 1,017 patients were randomized to treatment. In the PP 
population, 489 and 487 patients received UMEC and TIO, respectively. In the PP 
population, change from baseline in trough FEV1 was greater with UMEC versus TIO 
at day 85, meeting non-inferiority and superiority margins (difference: 59 mL; 
95% confidence interval [CI]: 29-88; P<0.001). Similar results were observed in 
the intent-to-treat analysis of trough FEV1 at day 85 (53 mL, 95% CI: 25-81; 
P<0.001). Improvements in weighted mean FEV1 over 0-24 hours post-dose at day 84 
were similar with UMEC and TIO but significantly greater with UMEC versus TIO 
over 12-24 hours post-dose (70 mL; P=0.015). Clinically meaningful improvements 
in Transition Dyspnea Index and St George's Respiratory Questionnaire were 
observed with both treatments at all time points. No differences were observed 
between UMEC and TIO in patient-reported outcomes. Overall incidences of adverse 
events were similar for UMEC and TIO.
CONCLUSION: UMEC 62.5 μg demonstrated superior efficacy to TIO 18 μg on the 
primary end point of trough FEV1 at day 85. Safety profiles were similar for 
both treatments.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S102494
PMCID: PMC4827908
PMID: 27103795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Respirology. 2017 Oct;22(7):1313-1319. doi: 10.1111/resp.13100. Epub 2017 Jun 
27.

Long-acting beta2-agonists versus long acting muscarinic antagonists in patients 
with stable COPD: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials.

Chen WC(1), Huang CH(2)(3), Sheu CC(4)(5)(6), Chong IW(4)(6)(7), Chu KA(8), Chen 
YC(9), Tsai JR(4)(6)(10), Lee CH(11), Wei YF(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, E-Da Hospital, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, E-Da Hospital, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(3)Center for Evidence-Based Medicine and Center for Meta-Analysis Research, 
E-Da Hospital, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(6)Research Center for Environmental Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Respiratory Therapy and Graduate Institute of Medicine, College 
of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(8)Division of Chest Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Kaohsiung-Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(9)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung 
Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(10)Department of Respiratory Therapy, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(11)Division of Chest Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng 
Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan.
(12)Institute of Biotechnology and Chemical Engineering, I-Shou University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(13)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, E-Da 
Hospital, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Comment in
    Respirology. 2017 Oct;22(7):1239-1240.

Several long-acting bronchodilators have been developed and are widely used as 
first-line treatment in patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). However, the initial choice of therapy is still uncertain. The 
aim of this study was to examine the clinical efficacy and safety of long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA) in patients 
with stable COPD. We searched several databases and manufacturers' websites to 
identify relevant randomized clinical trials for meta-analysis. Outcomes of 
interest were trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1 ), acute 
exacerbations, transitional dyspnoea index (TDI) score, St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ) score and adverse events. Sixteen trials with a total of 
22 872 patients were included in this study. Compared with LABA, LAMA were 
associated with a greater reduction in acute exacerbations (OR: 0.84, 95% CI: 
0.74-0.94, P = 0.003) and fewer adverse events (OR: 0.92, 95% CI: 0.86-0.97, 
P = 0.005). There were no significant differences in trough FEV1 , TDI and SGRQ 
scores. In patients with stable COPD, LAMA were associated with a greater 
reduction in acute exacerbations and fewer adverse effects compared with LABA.

© 2017 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13100
PMID: 28654201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jan 31;12:477-486. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S122354. eCollection 2017.

Long-acting bronchodilators with or without inhaled corticosteroids and 30-day 
readmission in patients hospitalized for COPD.

Bishwakarma R(1), Zhang W(1), Kuo YF(2), Sharma G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and 
Sleep Medicine.
(2)Office of Biostatistics; Sealy Center of Aging, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and 
Sleep Medicine; Sealy Center of Aging, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: The ability of a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and 
long-acting beta 2 agonists (LABAs; long-acting bronchodilators, LABDs) with or 
without inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) to reduce early readmission in 
hospitalized patients with COPD is unknown.
METHODS: We studied a 5% sample of Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in Medicare 
parts A, B and D and hospitalized for COPD in 2011. We examined prescriptions 
filled for LABDs with or without ICSs (LABDs±ICSs) within 90 days prior to and 
30 days after hospitalization. Primary outcome was the 30-day readmission rate 
between "users" and "nonusers" of LABDs±ICSs. Propensity score matching and 
sensitivity analysis were performed by limiting analysis to patients 
hospitalized for acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD). Among 6,066 patients 
hospitalized for COPD, 3,747 (61.8%) used LABDs±ICSs during the specified 
period. The "user" and "nonuser" groups had similar rates of all-cause emergency 
room (ER) visits and readmissions within 30 days of discharge date (22.4% vs 
20.7%, P-value 0.11; 18.0% vs 17.8%, P-value 0.85, respectively). However, the 
"users" had higher rates of COPD-related ER visits (5.3% vs 3.4%, P-value 
0.0006), higher adjusted odds ratio (aOR) 1.47 (95% CI, 1.11-1.93) and 
readmission (7.8% vs 5.0%, P-value <0.0001 and aOR 1.48 [95% CI, 1.18-1.86]) 
than "nonusers". After propensity score matching, the aOR of COPD-related ER 
visits was 1.45 (95% CI, 1.07-1.96) and that of readmission was 1.34 (95% CI, 
1.04-1.73). The results were similar when restricted to patients hospitalized 
for AECOPD.
CONCLUSION: Use of LABDs±ICSs did not reduce 30-day readmissions in patients 
hospitalized for COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S122354
PMCID: PMC5293361
PMID: 28203071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr Sharma serves on the advisory 
board of Theravance Biopharma, Mylan and Sunovion pharmaceutical companies. The 
authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


27. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2016 Apr;10(2):89-104. doi: 10.1177/1753465815624612. Epub 
2016 Jan 8.

Comparative efficacy of fixed-dose combinations of long acting muscarinic 
antagonists and long-acting beta-agonists: a systematic review and network 
meta-analysis.

Schlueter M(1), Gonzalez-Rojas N(2), Baldwin M(2), Groenke L(2), Voss F(2), 
Reason T(3).

Author information:
(1)IMS Health, 210 Pentonville Road, London N1 9JY, UK 
mschlueter@uk.imshealth.com.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH,  Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(3)IMS Health, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: A number of long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting 
beta-agonist (LABA) fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) for treatment of 
moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have 
recently become available, but none have been directly compared in head-to-head 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs). The purpose of this study was to assess the 
relative clinical benefit of all currently available LAMA/LABA FDCs using a 
Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA).
METHODS: A systematic literature review identified RCTs investigating the 
efficacy, safety and quality of life associated with licensed LAMA/LABA FDCs for 
the treatment of moderate-to-very severe COPD. RCTs were screened for inclusion 
in the NMA using prespecified eligibility criteria. Data were extracted for 
outcomes of interest, including change in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 
second (tFEV1) from baseline, St. George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) 
percentage of responders, Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) percentage of 
responders, change in SGRQ score from baseline, change in TDI focal score from 
baseline, moderate-to-severe exacerbations, all-cause discontinuation, and 
discontinuation due to adverse events.
RESULTS: Following screening, a total of 27 trials from 26 publications with 
30,361 subjects were eligible for inclusion in the NMA. Nonsignificant results 
were seen in most analyses comparing efficacy, exacerbations and discontinuation 
rates of included LAMA/LABA FDCs (i.e. aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg, 
glycopyrronium/indacaterol 110/50 µg, tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 µg, 
umeclidinium/vilanterol 62.5/25 µg). Meta-regression controlling for 
post-bronchodilator percentage of tFEV1 predicted at baseline as well as 
meta-regression adjusting for concomitant use of inhaled corticosteroids at 
baseline was performed to assess the magnitude of effect modification and 
produced similar results as observed in the base case analysis.
CONCLUSION: All LAMA/LABA FDCs were found to have similar efficacy and safety. 
Definitive assessment of the relative efficacy of different treatments can only 
be performed through direct comparison in head-to-head RCTs. In the absence of 
such data, this indirect comparison may be of value in clinical and health 
economic decision-making.

© The Author(s), 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815624612
PMCID: PMC5933564
PMID: 26746383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) 
declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Max Schlueter and Tim 
Reason are full-time employees of IMS Health, who served as paid consultants to 
Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH during the development of this study and manuscript. 
Michael Baldwin, Nuria Gonzalez-Rojas Guix, Lars Groenke and Florian Voss are 
full-time employees of Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH.


28. Chest. 2016 May;149(5):1181-96. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.02.646. Epub 2016 Feb 
26.

A Systematic Review With Meta-Analysis of Dual Bronchodilation With LAMA/LABA 
for the Treatment of Stable COPD.

Calzetta L(1), Rogliani P(2), Matera MG(3), Cazzola M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, 
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Systems Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, 
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Chair of Respiratory Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Pharmacology, Second University 
of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Systems Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, 
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Chair of Respiratory Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. 
Electronic address: mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Apr 1;197(7):944-946.

BACKGROUND: The wide availability of long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA)/long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) in the 
absence of head-to-head comparative pragmatic trials makes it difficult to 
choose which combination should be used. Therefore, we carried out a systematic 
review with meta-analysis that incorporated the data from trials lasting at 
least 3 months to evaluate the effectiveness of LAMA/LABA FDCs for COPD 
treatment.
METHODS: Randomized controlled trials were identified by searching different 
databases of published and unpublished trials. We aimed to assess the influence 
of LAMA/LABA combinations on trough FEV1, transitional dyspnea index, St. 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire, and cardiac safety vs monocomponents.
RESULTS: Fourteen papers and one congress abstract with 23,168 patients with 
COPD (combinations, n = 10,328; monocomponents, n = 12,840) were included in 
this study. Our results showed that all LAMA/LABA combinations were always more 
effective than the LAMA or LABA alone in terms of the improvement in trough 
FEV1. Although there was not significant difference among LAMA/LABA 
combinations, we identified a gradient of effectiveness among the currently 
available LAMA/LABA FDCs. LAMA/LABA combinations also improved both transitional 
dyspnea index and St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire scores, but did not 
increase the cardiovascular risk when compared with monocomponents.
CONCLUSIONS: The gradient of effectiveness emerging from this meta-analysis is 
merely a weak indicator of possible differences between the various LAMA/LABA 
FDCs. Only direct comparisons will document if a specific LAMA/LABA FDC is 
better than the other. In the meanwhile, we believe it is only proper to 
consider that dual bronchodilation is better than a LAMA or a LABA alone, 
regardless of the drugs used.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.02.646
PMID: 26923629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Postgrad Med. 2017 Jun;129(5):500-512. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2017.1317575. Epub 
2017 Apr 20.

Safety of inhaled long-acting anti-muscarinic agents in COPD.

Hanania NA(1), Lareau SC(2), Yawn BP(3).

Author information:
(1)a Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine , Baylor College of 
Medicine , Houston , TX , USA.
(2)b College of Nursing , University of Colorado Denver , Aurora , CO , USA.
(3)c Department of Family and Community Health , University of Minnesota , 
Minneapolis , MN , USA.

Evidence-based guidelines recommend inhaled long-acting anti-muscarinic agents 
(LAMAs) as first-line maintenance therapy for symptomatic patients with COPD. 
Several LAMAs are now available for use either as monotherapy or in combination 
with other COPD medications, including long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) or 
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). The efficacy and long-term safety of these 
medications have been evaluated in multiple clinical trials and real-life 
studies. This review evaluates the evidence available on the safety of existing 
LAMAs alone or in combination with LABAs and ICS in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2017.1317575
PMID: 28395575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Lancet. 2016 Sep 3;388(10048):963-73. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31354-X. Epub 
2016 Sep 1.

Single inhaler triple therapy versus inhaled corticosteroid plus long-acting 
beta-agonist therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (TRILOGY): a 
double-blind, parallel group, randomised controlled trial.

Singh D(1), Papi A(2), Corradi M(3), Pavlišová I(4), Montagna I(5), Francisco 
C(6), Cohuet G(6), Vezzoli S(5), Scuri M(5), Vestbo J(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK. Electronic address: dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(2)Research Centre on Asthma and COPD, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Italy.
(4)Odborny Plicni Lekar, Poliklinika Moravsky Krumlov, Moravsky Krumlov, Czech 
Republic.
(5)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.
(6)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi SAS, Courbevoie, France.
(7)Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2016 Sep 3;388(10048):936.
    Lancet. 2016 Sep 3;388(10048):937-8.
    Ann Intern Med. 2016 Dec 20;165(12 ):JC67.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Apr 1;197(7):944-946.

BACKGROUND: Few data are available for the efficacy of "triple therapy" with two 
long-acting bronchodilators and an inhaled corticosteroid in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). We designed this study to assess efficacy of 
single-inhaler combination of an extra fine formulation of beclometasone 
dipropionate, formoterol fumarate, and glycopyrronium bromide (BDP/FF/GB) in 
COPD compared with beclometasone dipropionate and formoterol fumarate (BDP/FF) 
treatment.
METHODS: TRILOGY was a randomised, parallel group, double-blind, 
active-controlled study done in 159 sites across 14 countries. The sites were a 
mixture of primary, secondary, and tertiary care providers, and specialist 
investigation units. Eligible patients with COPD had post-bronchodilator forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of lower than 50%, one or more 
moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbation in the previous 12 months, COPD Assessment 
Test total score of 10 or more, and a Baseline Dyspnea Index focal score of 10 
or less. Patients who met the inclusion and exclusion criteria at screening 
entered a 2-week open-label run-in period where they received beclometasone 
dipropionate (100 μg) and formoterol fumarate (6 μg) in two actuations twice 
daily. Patients were then randomly assigned (1:1) with an interactive response 
technology system to either continue BDP (100 μg) and FF (6 μg) or step-up to 
BDP (100 μg), FF (6 μg), and GB (12·5 μg) in two actuations twice daily for 52 
weeks via pressurised metered-dose inhaler. The three co-primary endpoints were 
pre-dose FEV1, 2-h post-dose FEV1, and Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) focal 
score, all measured at week 26 in the intention-to-treat population (all 
patients who were randomly assigned and received at least one dose of study drug 
and had at least one post-baseline efficacy assessment). Safety outcomes were 
measured in the safety population (all patients who were randomly assigned and 
received at least one dose of study drug). Secondary endpoints included 
moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbation rate over 52 weeks. This study is 
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov number NCT01917331.
FINDINGS: Between March 21, 2014, and Jan 14, 2016, 1368 patients received 
either BDP/FF/GB (n=687) or BDP/FF (n=681). At week 26, BDP/FF/GB improved 
pre-dose FEV1 by 0·081 L (95% CI 0·052-0·109; p<0·001) and 2-h post-dose FEV1 by 
0·117 L (0·086-0·147; p<0·001) compared with BDP/FF. Mean TDI focal scores at 
week 26 were 1·71 for BDP/FF/GB and 1·50 for BDP/FF, with a difference of 0·21 
(95% CI -0·08 to 0·51; p=0·160). Adjusted annual moderate-to-severe exacerbation 
frequencies were 0·41 for BDP/FF/GB and 0·53 for BDP/FF (rate ratio 0·77 [95% CI 
0·65-0·92]; p=0·005), corresponding to a 23% reduction in exacerbations with 
BDP/FF/GB compared with BDP/FF. Adverse events were reported by 368 (54%) 
patients with BDP/FF/GB and 379 (56%) with BDP/FF. One serious treatment-related 
adverse event occurred (atrial fibrillation) in a patient in the BDP/FF/GB 
group.
INTERPRETATION: We provide evidence for the clinical benefits of stepping up 
patients with COPD from an inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist 
combination treatment to triple therapy using a single inhaler.
FUNDING: Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31354-X
PMID: 27598678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Mar 17;12:907-922. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S130482. eCollection 2017.

LABA/LAMA combinations versus LAMA monotherapy or LABA/ICS in COPD: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Rodrigo GJ(1), Price D(2), Anzueto A(3), Singh D(4), Altman P(5), Bader G(6), 
Patalano F(6), Fogel R(5), Kostikas K(6).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Emergencia, Hospital Central de las Fuerzas Armadas, 
Montevideo, Uruguay.
(2)Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of 
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland, UK; Observational and Pragmatic Research 
Institute, Singapore.
(3)University of Texas Health Science Center; South Texas Veterans Health Care 
System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(4)Medicines Evaluation Unit, National Institute for Health Research Respiratory 
and Allergy Clinical Research Facility, University Hospital of South Manchester 
NHS Foundation Trust, University of Manchester, Manchester, England, UK.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(6)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) indicate that long-acting 
bronchodilator combinations, such as beta-agonist (LABA)/muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA), have favorable efficacy compared with commonly used COPD treatments. The 
objective of this analysis was to compare the efficacy and safety of LABA/LAMA 
with LAMA or LABA/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) in adults with stable 
moderate-to-very-severe COPD.
METHODS: This systematic review and meta-analysis (PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, 
Cochrane Library and clinical trial/manufacturer databases) included RCTs 
comparing ≥12 weeks' LABA/LAMA treatment with LAMA and/or LABA/ICS (approved 
doses only). Eligible studies were independently selected by two authors using 
predefined data fields; the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses guidelines were followed.
RESULTS: Eighteen studies (23 trials) were eligible (N=20,185). LABA/LAMA 
significantly improved trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) from 
baseline to week 12 versus both LAMA and LABA/ICS (0.07 L and 0.08 L, P<0.0001), 
with patients more likely to achieve clinically important improvements in FEV1 
of >100 mL (risk ratio [RR]: 1.33, 95% confidence interval [CI]: [1.20, 1.46] 
and RR: 1.44, 95% CI: [1.33, 1.56], respectively, the number needed to treat 
being eight and six, respectively). LABA/LAMA improved transitional dyspnea 
index and St George's Respiratory Questionnaire scores at week 12 versus LAMA 
(both P<0.0001), but not versus LABA/ICS, and reduced rescue medication use 
versus both (P<0.0001 and P=0.001, respectively). LABA/LAMA significantly 
reduced moderate/severe exacerbation rate compared with LABA/ICS (RR 0.82, 95% 
CI: [0.75, 0.91]). Adverse event (AE) incidence was no different for LABA/LAMA 
versus LAMA treatment, but it was lower versus LABA/ICS (RR 0.94, 95% CI: [0.89, 
0.99]), including a lower pneumonia risk (RR 0.59, 95% CI: [0.43, 0.81]). 
LABA/LAMA presented a lower risk for withdrawals due to lack of efficacy versus 
LAMA (RR: 0.66, 95% CI: [0.51, 0.87]) and due to AEs versus LABA/ICS (RR: 0.83, 
95% CI: [0.69, 0.99]).
CONCLUSION: The greater efficacy and comparable safety profiles observed with 
LABA/LAMA combinations versus LAMA or LABA/ICS support their potential role as 
first-line treatment options in COPD. These findings are of direct relevance to 
clinical practice because we included all currently available LABA/LAMAs and 
comparators, only at doses approved for clinical use.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S130482
PMCID: PMC5364009
PMID: 28360514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure GJR has participated as a lecturer, 
speaker and advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship of 
Air Products and Chemicals Inc, Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Laboratorios Dr Esteve, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Sharp & Dome and Novartis. DP has 
board membership with Aerocrine, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, and Teva Pharmaceuticals; consultancy 
agreements with Almirall, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals, and Theravance; grants and unrestricted funding for 
investigator-initiated studies (conducted through Observational and Pragmatic 
Research Institute Pte Ltd) from Aerocrine, AKL Ltd, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, British Lung Foundation, Chiesi, Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Respiratory Effectiveness Group, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceuticals, 
Theravance, UK National Health Service, Zentiva; payment for lectures/speaking 
engagements from Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Kyorin, Meda, Merck, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Skyepharma, 
Takeda, and Teva Pharmaceuticals; payment for manuscript preparation from 
Mundipharma and Teva Pharmaceuticals; payment for the development of educational 
materials from Mundipharma and Novartis; payment for 
travel/accommodation/meeting expenses from Aerocrine, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, and Teva Pharmaceuticals; funding for 
patient enrolment or completion of research from Chiesi, Novartis, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals, and Zentiva; stock/stock options from AKL Ltd which produces 
phytopharmaceuticals; owns 74% of the social enterprise Optimum Patient Care 
Ltd, UK and 74% of Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd, 
Singapore; and is peer reviewer for grant committees of the Efficacy and 
Mechanism Evaluation programme, HTA, and Medical Research Council. AA has acted 
as a Consultant and has served on advisory boards for Novartis Pharma AG, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline and Sunnovion. DS has 
received sponsorship to attend international meetings, honoraria for lecturing 
or attending advisory boards and research grants from various pharmaceutical 
companies, including Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, Merck, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Respivert, 
Skyepharma, Takeda, Teva, Therevance and Verona. PA, GB, FP, RF and KK are 
employees and shareholders of Novartis Pharma AG. KK had previously received 
honoraria for educational activities and lectures from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, Elpen, and Novartis, and participated on advisory boards 
arranged by AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Elpen, and Novartis. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this work.


32. Respir Med. 2016 Apr;113:65-73. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.02.002. Epub 2016 Feb 
9.

Adverse events among COPD patients treated with long acting beta agonistss and 
beta-agonists in an outpatient respiratory clinic.

Rodrigue C(1), Beauchesne MF(2), Savaria F(1), Forget A(1), Lemière C(3), 
Larivée P(4), Blais L(5); RESP Investigators.

Collaborators: Bacon S, Beauchesne MF, Blais L, Lavoie K, Lemiere C, Moullec G, 
Pepin V, Spahija A.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Université de Montréal, Montreal, H3C 3J7, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Université de Montréal, Montreal, H3C 3J7, Canada; 
Pharmacy Department, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, 
J1H 5N4, Canada; Centre de Recherche, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, J1H 5N4, Canada; Faculty of Medicine, Université de 
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, J1H 5N4, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, H3C 3J7, Canada; 
Research Center, Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal, Montreal, H4J 1C5, Canada.
(4)Centre de Recherche, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, J1H 5N4, Canada; Faculty of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, J1H 5N4, Canada.
(5)Faculty of Pharmacy, Université de Montréal, Montreal, H3C 3J7, Canada; 
Research Center, Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal, Montreal, H4J 1C5, Canada. 
Electronic address: lucie.blais@umontreal.ca.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the fourth leading 
cause of death in Canada. Most patients with COPD receive long-term treatment 
with long acting beta agonistss (LAAC) and/or long-acting beta-agonists (LABA). 
Adverse events (AEs) are also likely during long-term treatment with these 
medications.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prevalence of AEs in COPD patients on LAAC and LABA 
in a real-world setting.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study of patients enrolled in the 
Registre de Données en Santé Pulmonaire (RESP) database, which records 
information on Canadian patients with asthma or COPD. COPD Patients completed a 
questionnaire about AEs that may be associated with LAAC and/or LABA. The 
prevalence of AEs and the corresponding 95% CI were calculated for three groups 
of patients (LAAC + LABA, LAAC alone, and LABA alone).
RESULTS: Most patients with COPD (n = 154) were current or ex-smokers. Over 50% 
of patients were overweight or obese, and had an annual family income of less or 
equal to $42,000. Dry mouth (55.2%, 40%, and 43.5%) and dry throat (33.6%, 
26.7%, and 34.8%) occurred most of the time or always in the LAAC + LABA, LAAC, 
and LABA groups, respectively. Headache was reported by 17.4% of patients in the 
LABA group, but less than 11.2% in the other groups.
CONCLUSION: AEs reported in this study deserve clinical attention because they 
may negatively affect quality of life and treatment adherence of COPD patients.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.02.002
PMID: 26896922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur Respir J. 2017 Sep 9;50(3):1602265. doi: 10.1183/13993003.02265-2016. Print 
2017 Sep.

Prevention of COPD exacerbations: a European Respiratory Society/American 
Thoracic Society guideline.

Wedzicha JA(1), Calverley PMA(2), Albert RK(3), Anzueto A(4), Criner GJ(5), 
Hurst JR(6), Miravitlles M(7), Papi A(8), Rabe KF(9), Rigau D(10), Sliwinski 
P(11), Tonia T(12), Vestbo J(13), Wilson KC(14), Krishnan JA(15).

Author information:
(1)Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(2)Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, 
UK.
(3)Dept of Medicine, University of Colorado, Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)University of Texas Health Science Center and South Texas Veterans Health 
Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(5)Dept of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)UCL Respiratory, University College London, London, UK.
(7)Pneumology Dept, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, CIBER de Enfermedades 
Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain mmiravitlles@vhebron.net.
(8)Respiratory Medicine, Dept of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(9)Dept of Internal Medicine, Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel and 
LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Centre North, German Centre for Lung 
Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany.
(10)Iberoamerican Cochrane Center, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)2nd Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung 
Diseases, Warsaw, Poland.
(12)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(13)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(14)Dept of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(15)University of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, Chicago, IL, 
USA.

This document provides clinical recommendations for the prevention of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. It represents a 
collaborative effort between the European Respiratory Society and the American 
Thoracic Society.Comprehensive evidence syntheses were performed to summarise 
all available evidence relevant to the Task Force's questions. The evidence was 
appraised using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and 
Evaluation approach and the results were summarised in evidence profiles. The 
evidence syntheses were discussed and recommendations formulated by a 
multidisciplinary Task Force of COPD experts.After considering the balance of 
desirable (benefits) and undesirable consequences (burden in the form of adverse 
effects and cost), quality of evidence, feasibility, and acceptability of 
various interventions, the Task Force made recommendations for mucolytic, 
long acting muscarinic antagonist, phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor (roflumilast) 
and macrolide therapy, as well as a conditional recommendation against 
fluoroquinolone therapy. All of the recommendations were conditional, except for 
a strong recommendation for the use of a long-acting antimuscarinic agent versus 
a long-acting beta-adrenergic, indicating that there was uncertainty about the 
balance of desirable and undesirable consequences of the intervention, and that 
well-informed patients may make different choices regarding whether to have or 
not have the specific intervention.The guideline summarises the evidence and 
provides recommendations for pharmacological therapy for the prevention of COPD 
exacerbations.

Copyright ©ERS 2017.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.02265-2016
PMID: 28889106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: D. Rigau and T. Tonia act 
as methodologists for the European Respiratory Society. All other disclosures 
can be found alongside this article at erj.ersjournals.com


34. Eur Respir J. 2017 May 23;49(5):1602245. doi: 10.1183/13993003.02245-2016. Print 
2017 May.

Concurrent use of long-acting bronchodilators in COPD and the risk of adverse 
cardiovascular events.

Suissa S(1), Dell'Aniello S(2), Ernst P(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute - Jewish General 
Hospital, Dept of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McGill University, Montréal, 
QC, Canada samy.suissa@mcgill.ca.
(2)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute - Jewish General 
Hospital, Dept of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McGill University, Montréal, 
QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2017 May 23;49(5):

The cardiovascular risk of concurrently using long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) 
and anticholinergics (LAMAs) in COPD is uncertain. We assessed the comparative 
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular safety of adding a second long-acting 
bronchodilator in patients with COPD.We identified a cohort of COPD patients, 
new users of LABA or the LAMA tiotropium during 2002-2012, from the UK Clinical 
Practice Research Datalink. Using high-dimensional propensity scores, each 
patient adding a second bronchodilator was matched with a patient who remained 
on monotherapy. Patients were followed for 1 year for the occurrence of acute 
myocardial infarction (AMI), stroke, heart failure and arrhythmia.The cohorts 
included up to 31 174 patients adding a bronchodilator matched to 31 174 
patients remaining on bronchodilator monotherapy. Adding a long-acting 
bronchodilator, compared to remaining on monotherapy, was not associated with an 
increased risk of AMI (hazard ratio (HR) 1.12, 95% CI 0.92-1.36), stroke (HR 
0.87, 95% CI 0.69-1.10) or arrhythmia (HR 1.05, 95% CI 0.81-1.36), but the risk 
was elevated for heart failure (HR 1.16, 95% CI 1.03-1.30).Adding a second 
long-acting bronchodilator in the real-world-setting treatment of COPD does not 
increase the risk of most cardiovascular events. The modest increase for heart 
failure warrants further investigation.

Copyright ©ERS 2017.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.02245-2016
PMID: 28536251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Disclosures can be found 
alongside this article at erj.ersjournals.com


35. J Bras Pneumol. 2017 Jul-Aug;43(4):302-312. doi: 
10.1590/S1806-37562016000000287.

long acting muscarinic antagonists vs. long-acting β 2 agonists in COPD 
exacerbations: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Maia IS(1), Pincelli MP(1), Leite VF(2), Amadera J(3), Buehler AM(4).

Author information:
(1). Departamento de Clínica Médica, Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade 
Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis (SC) Brasil.
(2). Instituto de Medicina Física e Reabilitação, Hospital das Clínicas, 
Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP) Brasil.
(3). Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, 
São Paulo (SP) Brasil.
(4). Instituto de Educação em Saúde e Ciências, Hospital Alemão Oswaldo Cruz, 
São Paulo (SP) Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) 
provide superior therapeutic effects over long-acting beta agonists (LABAs) for 
preventing COPD exacerbations.
METHODS: This was a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical 
trials involving patients with stable, moderate to severe COPD according to the 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease criteria, treated with a 
LAMA (i.e., tiotropium bromide, aclidinium, or glycopyrronium), followed for at 
least 12 weeks and compared with controls using a LABA in isolation or in 
combination with a corticosteroid.
RESULTS: A total of 2,622 studies were analyzed for possible inclusion on the 
basis of their title and abstract; 9 studies (17,120 participants) were included 
in the analysis. In comparison with LABAs, LAMAs led to a greater decrease in 
the exacerbation rate ratio (relative risk [RR] = 0.88; 95% CI: 0.84-0.93]; a 
lower proportion of patients who experienced at least one exacerbation (RR = 
0.90; 95% CI: 0.87-0.94; p < 0.00001); a lower risk of exacerbation-related 
hospitalizations (RR = 0.78; 95% CI: 0.69-0.87; p < 0.0001); and a lower number 
of serious adverse events (RR = 0.81; 95% CI: 0.67-0.96; p = 0.0002). The 
overall quality of evidence was moderate for all outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: The major findings of this systematic review and meta-analysis were 
that LAMAs significantly reduced the exacerbation rate (exacerbation 
episodes/year), as well as the number of exacerbation episodes, of 
hospitalizations, and of serious adverse events.

OBJETIVO: Determinar se long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs, antagonistas 
muscarínicos de longa duração) são superiores a long-acting beta agonists (LABAs, 
beta-agonistas de longa duração) na prevenção de exacerbações da DPOC.
MÉTODOS: Revisão sistemática e meta-análise de ensaios clínicos controlados 
aleatórios com pacientes com DPOC estável, de moderada a grave, conforme os 
critérios da Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease, tratados 
com LAMA (brometo de tiotrópio, aclidínio ou glicopirrônio), acompanhados 
durante pelo menos 12 semanas e comparados a controles que usaram LABA 
isoladamente ou com um corticosteroide.
RESULTADOS: Foram analisados 2.622 estudos para possível inclusão com base em 
seu título e resumo; 9 estudos (17.120 participantes) foram incluídos na 
análise. Em comparação com LABAs, LAMAs resultaram em maior diminuição da razão 
da taxa de exacerbações [risco relativo (RR) = 0,88; IC95%: 0,84-0,93]; menor 
proporção de pacientes que apresentaram pelo menos uma exacerbação (RR = 0,90; 
IC95%: 0,87-0,94; p < 0,00001); menor risco de hospitalizações em virtude de 
exacerbação da doença (RR = 0,78; IC95%: 0,69-0,87; p < 0,0001) e menor número 
de eventos adversos sérios (RR = 0,81; IC95%: 0,67-0,96; p = 0,0002). A 
qualidade geral das evidências foi moderada para todos os desfechos.
CONCLUSÕES: O principal achado desta revisão sistemática e meta-análise foi que 
LAMAs reduziram significativamente a taxa de exacerbações (episódios de 
exacerbação/ano), os episódios de exacerbação, as hospitalizações e os eventos 
adversos sérios.

DOI: 10.1590/S1806-37562016000000287
PMCID: PMC5687968
PMID: 28767773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Oct 8;13:3141-3147. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S179285. eCollection 2018.

Effects of a single long acting muscarinic antagonist agent and a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta-adrenoceptor agonist combination on lung 
function and symptoms in untreated COPD patients in Japan.

Yamada H(1)(2), Hida N(2), Hizawa N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, 
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan, h.yamada@md.tsukuba.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hitachinaka General Hospital, Hitachi 
Ltd, Hitachinaka, Ibaraki, Japan, h.yamada@md.tsukuba.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: A large body of evidence suggests that long-acting beta-adrenoceptor 
agonist (LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) combinations induce a 
strong synergistic bronchodilatory effect in human isolated airways. Moreover, a 
recent post hoc analysis demonstrated clinical synergism between LABAs and 
LAMAs, which induces a synergistic improvement not only in lung function but 
also in dyspnea in COPD patients.
AIM: The aim of this study is to examine the baseline factors related to 
improvement in lung function or clinical symptoms that results from the 
administration of LAMA or LAMA/LABA and to compare the differences in 
improvement in lung function or clinical symptoms between LAMA and LAMA/LABA.
METHODS: Among 829 patients with COPD who were treated with LAMA or LAMA/LABA in 
our hospital, 112 patients (aged 40-89 years) matched the criteria. Of these 112 
patients, 71 received LAMA (LAMA group) and 41 received LAMA/LABA (LAMA/LABA 
group) as the initial treatment. Various examination results such as lung 
function test values, symptom change, and frequency of exacerbations were 
compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: Compared with the monotherapy, the combination therapy significantly 
improved the FEV1, inspiratory capacity (IC), and total COPD assessment test 
(CAT) scores. Comparing the improvement in each domain of the CAT produced by 
the combination therapy with that of the monotherapy, larger improvements were 
found for the domains of going out and sleeping. The frequency of exacerbations 
during the 24 weeks was significantly lower in the combination therapy group 
than in the LAMA monotherapy group (P=0.034). Although no relationship was found 
between improvement in FEV1 and any pretreatment factors in the LAMA/LABA group, 
the improvement in the CAT score was strongly related to the baseline CAT score, 
smoking index, and air trapping index (P-value <1×10-4).
CONCLUSION: In this study of clinical practice, we found that LAMA/LABA 
combination therapy improved the clinical symptoms of COPD and IC and that the 
effects of the combination therapy were consistent with those observed in 
previous clinical trials.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S179285
PMCID: PMC6183692
PMID: 30349222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure HY has received lecture fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim. NHiz has received lecture fees from AstraZeneca, Astellas 
Pharma, and Boehringer Ingelheim. NHid has no conflicts of interest in this 
work.


37. Respir Med. 2017 Jan;122:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.11.008. Epub 2016 Nov 4.

Non-persistence and non-adherence to long-acting COPD medication therapy: A 
retrospective cohort study based on a large German claims dataset.

Mueller S(1), Wilke T(2), Bechtel B(3), Punekar YS(4), Mitzner K(5), Virchow 
JC(6).

Author information:
(1)IPAM, University of Wismar, Alter Holzhafen 19, 23966 Wismar, Germany. 
Electronic address: kontakt@ipam-wismar.de.
(2)IPAM, University of Wismar, Alter Holzhafen 19, 23966 Wismar, Germany.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline, Canada.
(4)GSK, Value Evidence and Outcomes, Brentford, TW8 9GS, UK.
(5)Apotheke der Universitätsmedizin Rostock, Ernst-Heydemann-Straße 7, 18057 
Rostock, Germany.
(6)Universitätsmedizin Rostock, Abteilungen für Pneumologie/Interdisziplinäre 
Internistische Intensivstation, Ernst-Heydemann-Straße 6, 18057 Rostock, 
Germany.

OBJECTIVES: The main objectives of this study, based on a large cohort of German 
COPD patients, were to assess the level of non-persistence (NP) and 
non-adherence (NA) with long-acting COPD inhaler treatment and to describe 
factors that may be associated with NP and NA.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort analysis based on claims data provided 
by a German statutory health insurance fund (years 2010-2012). NP was analyzed 
for treatment-naïve patients only; it was defined as a gap of >90 days in 
medication availability. With regard to NA, first the overall yearly medication 
possession ratio (MPR) was analyzed, NA was defined as MPR<80%. Secondly, 
adherence was explored only for the period in which a patient continued therapy 
with a long-acting COPD agent (no gap>90 days).
RESULTS: 45,937 COPD patients who received at least one prescription of any 
long-acting COPD agent were identified (mean age 71.4 years; 45.2% female). 
Among these, 22,276 (42.4%) were classified as newly treated. The percentage of 
NP patients after 12 months was 65.3% on an overall patient level. 
Agent-specific NP rates were: 58.5% for LABA, 47.9% for LAMA, 78.0% for ICS, and 
69.4% for single-device LABA/ICS combination treatment. The overall 12-month MPR 
across all agent classes on a patient level was 57.9% (70.0% of patients 
classified as non-adherent). During periods of general treatment continuation, 
the mean MPR/NA rates were 85.0%/30.1% (patient level across all agents), 
89.3%/28.2% (LABA), 92.1%/16.2% (LAMA), 84.2%/43.8% (ICS) and 84.1%/42.8% 
(LABA/ICS combination). In the Cox regression analyses, several factors like 
female gender, higher CCI or lower number of specialist' visits were associated 
with earlier discontinuation of therapy. In comparison to LABA therapy, LAMA 
therapy was less likely to be associated with early NP, whereas patients who 
initiated ICS therapy or a single-device LABA/ICS combination therapy faced a 
higher NP risk.
CONCLUSIONS: In German COPD patients, persistence and adherence with respect to 
long-acting bronchodilator therapy is poor. Approximately two thirds of patients 
fail to continue treatment after 12 months. In addition, about one third 
implement their treatment poorly during periods of general therapy continuation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.11.008
PMID: 27993284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Lancet Respir Med. 2018 May;6(5):368-378. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(18)30054-7. 
Epub 2018 Feb 21.

Effect of lung deflation with indacaterol plus glycopyrronium on ventricular 
filling in patients with hyperinflation and COPD (CLAIM): a double-blind, 
randomised, crossover, placebo-controlled, single-centre trial.

Hohlfeld JM(1), Vogel-Claussen J(2), Biller H(3), Berliner D(4), Berschneider 
K(5), Tillmann HC(6), Hiltl S(5), Bauersachs J(4), Welte T(7).

Author information:
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Hannover, 
Germany; German Center for Lung Research (BREATH), Hannover, Germany; Department 
of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(2)German Center for Lung Research (BREATH), Hannover, Germany; Institute for 
Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(3)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Hannover, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Cardiology and Angiology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(5)Novartis Pharma GmbH, Clinical Research Respiratory, Nuremberg, Germany.
(6)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(7)German Center for Lung Research (BREATH), Hannover, Germany; Department of 
Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Electronic 
address: welte.tobias@mh-hannover.de.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2018 May;6(5):320-322.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary hyperinflation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) is associated with reduced biventricular end-diastolic volumes and 
increased morbidity and mortality. The combination of a long-acting β agonist 
(LABA) and a muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) is more effective in reducing 
hyperinflation than LABA-inhaled corticosteroid combination therapy but whether 
dual bronchodilation improves cardiac function is unknown.
METHODS: We did a double-blind, randomised, two-period crossover, 
placebo-controlled, single-centre study (CLAIM) at the Fraunhofer Institute of 
Toxicology and Experimental Medicine (Hannover, Germany), a specialty clinic. 
Eligible participants were patients aged at least 40 years with COPD, pulmonary 
hyperinflation (defined by a baseline residual volume >135% of predicted), a 
smoking history of at least ten pack-years, and airflow limitation (FEV1 <80% 
predicted and post-bronchodilator FEV1: forced vital capacity <0·7). Patients 
with stable cardiovascular disease were eligible, but those with arrhythmias, 
heart failure, unstable ischaemic heart disease, or uncontrolled hypertension 
were not. We randomly assigned participants (1:1) to either receive a combined 
inhaled dual bronchodilator containing the LABA indacaterol (110 μg as maleate 
salt) plus the LAMA glycopyrronium (50 μg as bromide salt) once per day for 14 
days, followed by a 14-day washout, then a matched placebo for 14 days, or to 
receive the same treatments in reverse order. The randomisation was done using 
lists and was concealed from patients and investigators. The primary endpoint 
was the effect of indacaterol-glycopyrronium versus placebo on left-ventricular 
end-diastolic volume measured by MRI done on day 1 (visit 4) and day 15 (visit 
5) in treatment period 1 and on day 29 (visit 6) and day 43 (visit 7) in 
treatment period 2 in the per-protocol population. Left-ventricular 
end-diastolic volume was indexed to body surface area. Safety was assessed in 
all participants who received at least one dose of the study drug. This study is 
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02442206.
FINDINGS: Between May 18, 2015, and April 20, 2017, we randomly assigned 62 
eligible participants to treatment; 30 to indacaterol-glycopyrronium followed by 
placebo and 32 to placebo followed by indacaterol-glycopyrronium. The 62 
randomly assigned patients were included in the intent-to-treat analysis. There 
were two protocol violations and therefore 60 were included in the per-protocol 
analysis. 57 patients completed both treatment periods. After 
indacaterol-glycopyrronium treatment, left-ventricular end-diastolic volume 
increased from a mean 55·46 mL/m2 (SD 15·89) at baseline to a least-squares (LS) 
mean of 61·76 mL/m2 (95% CI 57·68-65·84), compared with a change from 56·42 
mL/m2 at baseline (13·54) to 56·53 mL/m2 (52·43-60·62) after placebo (LS means 
treatment difference 5·23 mL/m2 [95% CI 3·22 to 7·25; p<0·0001]). The most 
common adverse events reported with indacaterol-glycopyrronium were cough (in 
nine patients [15%] of 59) and throat irritation (in seven [12%]). With placebo, 
the most common adverse events reported were headache (in five patients [8%] of 
61) and upper respiratory tract infection (in four [7%]). Two patients had 
serious adverse events: one (2%) after indacaterol-glycopyrronium (endometrial 
cancer) and one (2%) after placebo (myocardial infarction); these were not 
thought to be treatment related. No patients died during the study.
INTERPRETATION: This is the first study to analyse the effect of LABA-LAMA 
combination therapy on cardiac function in patients with COPD and lung 
hyperinflation. Dual bronchodilation with indacaterol-glycopyrronium 
significantly improved cardiac function as measured by left-ventricular 
end-diastolic volume. The results are important because of the known association 
of cardiovascular impairment with COPD, and support the early use of dual 
bronchodilation in patients with COPD who show signs of pulmonary 
hyperinflation.
FUNDING: Novartis Pharma GmbH.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(18)30054-7
PMID: 29477448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Respirology. 2015 Nov;20(8):1153-9. doi: 10.1111/resp.12603. Epub 2015 Aug 3.

long acting muscarinic antagonist + long-acting beta agonist versus long-acting 
beta agonist + inhaled corticosteroid for COPD: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Horita N(1)(2), Miyazawa N(1), Tomaru K(1), Inoue M(1), Kaneko T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saiseikai Yokohamashi Nanbu Hospital, 
Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

Some trials have been conducted to compare long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) + long-acting beta agonist (LABA) versus LABA + inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS) for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but no meta-analysis 
were reported. Two investigators independently searched for eligible articles 
using the PubMed, Web of Science and Cochrane databases. Articles in authors' 
reference files were also regarded as candidates. The eligibility criteria for 
the current meta-analysis were original trials written in English comparing the 
impact of LAMA + LABA and LABA + ICS for COPD patients. A pooled value for the 
continuous value was calculated using the genetic inverse variance method for 
mean difference. Incidence of events was evaluated using the odds ratio (OR). 
Minimal clinically important difference were 50 mL for forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s (FEV1 ), four points for St George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) and 
one point for transition dyspnoea index (TDI). We included seven randomized 
controlled trials and one cross-over trial with follow-up period of 6-26 weeks. 
Compared with LABA + ICS, LAMA + LABA led to significantly greater improvements 
of trough FEV1 by 71 (95% CI: 48-95) mL, TDI by 0.38 points (95% CI: 0.17-0.58), 
less exacerbations with an OR of 0.77 (95% CI: 0.62-0.96) and less pneumonia 
with an OR of 0.28 (95% CI: 0.12-0.68). Frequencies of any adverse event, 
serious adverse event, adverse event leading to discontinuation, all-cause death 
and change of total score of SGRQ were not different in both arms. LAMA + LABA 
might be a better option for treating COPD than LABA + ICS.

© 2015 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12603
PMID: 26235837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Respir Med. 2015 Oct;109(10):1312-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.08.002. Epub 2015 
Aug 12.

Tiotropium + olodaterol shows clinically meaningful improvements in quality of 
life.

Singh D(1), Ferguson GT(2), Bolitschek J(3), Grönke L(4), Hallmann C(4), Bennett 
N(5), Abrahams R(6), Schmidt O(7), Bjermer L(8).

Author information:
(1)The Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester, UK. Electronic address: 
dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(2)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Livonia, MI, USA.
(3)Krankenhaus der Elisabethinen, Linz, Austria.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc., Ridgefield, CT, USA.
(6)Morgantown Pulmonary Associates, Morgantown, WV, USA.
(7)Lungen- und Bronchialheilkunde, Koblenz, Germany.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.

Comment in
    Respir Med. 2017 Apr;125:104.

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium + olodaterol improves lung function and symptoms compared 
to monotherapies in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The OTEMTO 1 
and 2 studies investigated the effects of tiotropium + olodaterol on lung 
function and health-related quality of life compared to placebo in patients with 
moderate to severe COPD.
METHODS: In these two replicate, double-blind, parallel-group, 
placebo-controlled trials, patients were randomised to receive tiotropium + 
olodaterol 5/5 μg, 2.5/5 μg, tiotropium 5 μg or placebo for 12 weeks, via the 
Respimat(®) inhaler. Primary end points were St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score, forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) area 
under the curve from 0 to 3 h (AUC0-3) response and trough FEV1 response.
RESULTS: In OTEMTO 1 and 2, tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 μg improved SGRQ total 
score by 4.89 (95% confidence interval [CI] -6.90, -2.88) and 4.56 (95% CI 
-6.50, -2.63) units versus placebo (both p < 0.0001), and 2.49 (95% CI -4.47, 
-0.51; p < 0.05) and 1.72 (95% CI -3.63, 0.19) units versus tiotropium 5 μg. 
Tiotropium + olodaterol 2.5/5 μg significantly improved SGRQ score compared to 
placebo. Both doses significantly improved FEV1 AUC0-3 response compared to 
placebo and tiotropium 5 μg. Tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 and 2.5/5 μg also 
significantly improved trough FEV1 response compared to placebo (both studies) 
and separated from tiotropium 5 μg in OTEMTO 2. Adverse-event incidence was 
similar between treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: Tiotropium + olodaterol improved lung function and quality of life 
compared to placebo and tiotropium 5 μg.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01964352 and NCT02006732.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.08.002
PMID: 26320402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Dec;94(51):e2306. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002306.

Long-acting Inhaled Bronchodilator and Risk of Vascular Events in Patients With 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in Taiwan Population.

Tsai MJ(1), Chen CY, Huang YB, Chao HC, Yang CJ, Lin PJ, Tsai YH.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology, China Medical University Hospital (M-JT); 
School of Medicine, Medical College, China Medical University, Taichung (M-JT); 
Department of Neurology, China Medical University An-Nan Hospital, Tainan 
(M-JT); Department of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital (C-YC, 
Y-BH); School of Pharmacy, Master Program in Clinical Pharmacy, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung (C-YC, Y-BH, P-JL, Y-HT); Department of Pharmacy, 
Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan (H-CC); Department of Respiratory Therapy, 
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung (C-JY); and Department of Pharmacy, 
Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC (P-JL).

Erratum in
    Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Feb;95(8):e78fe.
    Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Mar 03;95(8):e78fe.

A combination of long acting beta agonists agents (LAACs) and long-acting 
beta-adrenergic receptor agonist (LABA) is effective in improving lung function in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) compared with monotherapy. However, 
evidence on whether this combination increases the incidence of stroke or other 
cardiac events remains sparse. The objective of the present study was to 
investigate the incidence of stroke and other cardiovascular diseases in COPD 
patients treated with LAAC, LABA, or a combination of the 2.We conducted this 
population-based study using the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research 
Database (1997-2008), identifying COPD patients and their prescribed medication 
from the International Classification of Disease, Ninth Revision codes 490-492 
or 496. A multivariate Cox proportional-hazards model was used to compare the 
risk of stroke and other cardiovascular diseases over the 11-year period after 
treatment with LAAC or LABA only or in combination.Of the 596 COPD patients 
(mean age 70 y), 196 were treated with LAAC, 318 with LABA, and 82 were treated 
with a combination. The overall incidence of stroke (8.53%) significantly 
increased in the combination group compared with LAAC (2.04%) or LABA (1.26%) 
only. In the Cox regression analysis, the adjusted hazard ratio over the 11-year 
survey period for stroke in patients treated with the combination compared with 
LABA only was 1.04 (95% confidence interval, 1.06-2.99) and for LAAC, it was 
0.31 (95% confidence interval, 0.02-2.32).This cohort study using a large health 
insurance database showed that treating patients with COPD, with a combination 
of LAAC and LABA, may be associated with an increased hazard of stroke compared 
with treatment with either agent alone. We should be particularly cautious about 
comedication of LAAC and LABA in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002306
PMCID: PMC4697980
PMID: 26705214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Thorax. 2016 Jan;71(1):15-25. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206732. Epub 2015 Oct 
21.

Efficacy and safety of long-acting β-agonist/long acting muscarinic antagonist 
combinations in COPD: a network meta-analysis.

Oba Y(1), Sarva ST(1), Dias S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Environmental Medicine, University 
of Missouri, School of Medicine, Columbia, USA.
(2)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

Comment in
    Praxis (Bern 1994). 2016 Feb 3;105(3):167-8.

BACKGROUND: The place of long-acting β agonist/long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LABA/LAMA) combinations in stable patients with COPD is not well defined. The 
purpose of this study was to systematically review the efficacy and safety of 
LABA/LAMA combinations.
METHODS: Several databases and manufacturers' websites were searched for 
relevant clinical trials. Randomised control trials, at least 12 weeks duration, 
comparing a LABA/LAMA combination with placebo and/or monotherapy were included. 
The data were pooled using a network as well as a traditional direct comparison 
meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Twenty-three trials with a total of 27 172 patients were included in 
the analysis. LABA/LAMA combinations were associated with a greater improvement 
in lung function, St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) score, and 
Transitional Dyspnoea Index (TDI) than monotherapies. LABA/LAMA combinations 
were associated with a significantly greater proportion of SGRQ and TDI 
responders than monotherapies (OR 1.23 (95% credible interval (CrI) 1.06-1.39), 
OR 1.34 (95% CrI 1.19-1.50) versus LABAs and OR 1.24 (95% CrI 1.11-1.36), OR 
1.31 (95% CrI 1.18-1.46) versus LAMAs, respectively) and fewer 
moderate-to-severe exacerbations compared with LABAs (HR 0.82 (95% CrI 
0.73-0.93)), but not when compared with LAMAs (HR 0.92 (95% CrI 0.84-1.00)). 
There were no statistically significant differences associated with LABA/LAMA 
combinations compared with monotherapies in safety outcomes as well as in severe 
exacerbations.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination therapy was the most effective strategy in 
improving lung function, quality of life, symptom scores and moderate-to-severe 
exacerbation rates, and had similar effects on safety outcomes and severe 
exacerbations as compared with monotherapies.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206732
PMID: 26490732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Adv Ther. 2017 Nov;34(11):2518-2533. doi: 10.1007/s12325-017-0626-4. Epub 2017 
Nov 1.

Comparative Efficacy of Once-Daily Umeclidinium/Vilanterol and 
Tiotropium/Olodaterol Therapy in Symptomatic Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease: A Randomized Study.

Feldman GJ(1), Sousa AR(2), Lipson DA(3)(4), Tombs L(5), Barnes N(6), Riley 
JH(7), Patel S(6), Naya I(8), Compton C(6), Alcázar Navarrete B(9).

Author information:
(1)S. Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Spartanburg, SC, USA. gfeld3232@aol.com.
(2)Respiratory Research and Development, GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park West, 
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(3)Respiratory Research and Development, GlaxoSmithKline, King of Prussia, PA, 
USA.
(4)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(5)Precise Approach Ltd, Birmingham, West Midlands, UK.
(6)Global Respiratory Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(7)Respiratory Therapy Area Unit, GlaxoSmithKline Medicines Research Centre, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, UK.
(8)Respiratory Medicine, GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(9)Neumología, Hospital de Alta Resolución de Loja, Granada, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: We report the results of the first direct comparison of the 
once-daily fixed-dose long acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta-agonist 
(LAMA/LABA) combinations umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI) and 
tiotropium/olodaterol (TIO/OLO) in patients with COPD.
METHODS: This was a randomized, two-period crossover open-label study in 
symptomatic patients with COPD [age 40 years or older, postbronchodilator forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 70% or less and 50% or more of predicted 
normal values, and modified Medical Research Council Dyspnoea Scale score of 2 
or greater] not receiving inhaled corticosteroid therapy. Patients were 
randomized to receive UMEC/VI (62.5/25 µg once daily) via a multidose dry powder 
inhaler (ELLIPTA) followed by TIO/OLO (5/5 µg once daily) via a soft mist 
inhaler (Respimat), each for 8 weeks with an interim 3-week washout or vice 
versa. The primary end point was the change from baseline in trough FEV1 at week 
8 with a noninferiority margin of - 50 mL in the per-protocol (PP) population. 
The incidence of adverse events was also assessed.
RESULTS: In total, 236 patients (mean age 64.4 years, 60% male) were included in 
the intent-to-treat population and 227 were included in the PP population. 
UMEC/VI treatment was noninferior in the PP population and superior in the 
intent-to-treat population to TIO/OLO treatment with regard to trough FEV1 at 
week 8 [FEV1 change from baseline 180 mL vs 128 mL; difference 52 mL (95% 
confidence interval 28-77 mL); p < 0.001]. Patients receiving UMEC/VI had 
twofold increased odds of experiencing a clinically meaningful increase (100 mL 
or more) from baseline in trough FEV1 at week 8 compared with patients receiving 
TIO/OLO (odds ratio 2.05; 95% confidence interval 1.34-3.14). Adverse events 
occurred in 25% of patients in the UMEC/VI group and in 31% of patients in the 
TIO/OLO group.
CONCLUSION: In this first direct comparison of two once-daily fixed-dose 
LAMA/LABA combinations, superiority was observed for the primary end point of 
trough FEV1 at week 8 with UMEC/VI compared with TIO/OLO in patients with 
symptomatic COPD. Both treatments had similar safety profiles. These findings 
confirm the results of previous indirect LAMA/LABA comparisons, and show that an 
efficacy gradient exists within the LAMA/LABA class.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT02799784.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-017-0626-4
PMCID: PMC5702366
PMID: 29094315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Chest. 2019 Jun;155(6):1158-1165. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.03.005. Epub 2019 
Mar 26.

Comparative Effectiveness and Safety of LABA-LAMA vs LABA-ICS Treatment of COPD 
in Real-World Clinical Practice.

Suissa S(1), Dell'Aniello S(2), Ernst P(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General 
Hospital, and the Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Occupational 
Health, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. Electronic address: 
samy.suissa@mcgill.ca.
(2)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General 
Hospital, and the Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Occupational 
Health, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Chest. 2019 Aug;156(2):415-416.
    Chest. 2019 Aug;156(2):416-417.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) and long acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMAs) are recommended as initial maintenance treatments for COPD, 
with their combination (LABA-LAMA) advocated as the disease progresses. 
Randomized trials comparing the effectiveness of this combination with the 
alternative combination of LABA with inhaled corticosteroid (LABA-ICS) have 
reported conflicting data, while there are no real-world comparative 
effectiveness and safety studies of these regimens in clinical practice 
settings.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of patients with COPD during 2002-2015, age 55 
years or older, from the United Kingdom's Clinical Practice Research Datalink. 
Patients initiating LABA-LAMA on the same day (no ICS) were matched on 
time-conditional high-dimensional propensity scores with patients initiating 
LABA-ICS on the same day (no LAMA), and monitored for 1 year for the occurrence 
of a moderate or severe COPD exacerbation and severe pneumonia.
RESULTS: The cohort included 1,977 initiators of LABA-LAMA matched with 1,977 
initiators of LABA-ICS. The hazard ratio (HR) of moderate or severe COPD 
exacerbation associated with LABA-LAMA initiation, relative to LABA-ICS 
initiation, was 1.04 (95% CI, 0.90-1.20), while for a severe exacerbation it was 
0.94 (95% CI, 0.65-1.36). The incidence of severe pneumonia requiring 
hospitalization was lower with LABA-LAMA initiation (HR, 0.66; 95% CI, 
0.41-1.05), particularly in the on-treatment analysis (HR, 0.66; 95% CI, 
0.50-0.87).
CONCLUSIONS: In a real-world clinical practice setting of COPD treatment, 
combined LABA-LAMA inhalers appear to be as effective as combined LABA-ICS 
inhalers in preventing COPD exacerbations. However, a LABA-LAMA combination may 
be preferred because it is associated with fewer severe pneumonias.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.03.005
PMID: 30922950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Respir Res. 2017 Nov 2;18(1):182. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0647-1.

A 28-day, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group study of 
nebulized revefenacin in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Pudi KK(1), Barnes CN(2), Moran EJ(2), Haumann B(3), Kerwin E(4).

Author information:
(1)Upstate Pharmaceutical Research, Greenville, SC, USA.
(2)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Theravance Biopharma UK Limited, London, UK. bhaumann@theravance.com.
(4)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, Medford, OR, USA.

BACKGROUND: Revefenacin is a once-daily long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
in clinical development for the treatment of patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). In a dose-ranging study, nebulized once-daily 
revefenacin had a long duration of action in patients after 7 days' 
administration of doses up to 700 μg. In this multiple-dose study, the 
bronchodilation efficacy and adverse events profile were characterized in 
patients administered nebulized revefenacin once daily for 28 days.
METHODS: A total of 355 COPD patients (mean age 62 years, mean forced expiratory 
volume in 1 s [FEV1] 44% of predicted) were randomized in a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled parallel group study. Inhaled corticosteroids as well as 
short-acting bronchodilators were permitted. Once-daily treatments (44, 88, 175 
or 350 μg revefenacin or matching placebo) were administered by a standard jet 
nebulizer, for 28 days. The primary endpoint was change from baseline in D28 
trough FEV1, and secondary endpoints included weighted mean FEV1 over 0 to 24 h 
and rescue medication (albuterol) use. Safety evaluations included adverse 
events, laboratory assessments, electrocardiograms and 24-h Holter profiles.
RESULTS: Revefenacin (88, 175 and 350 μg) significantly improved D28 trough FEV1 
over placebo (187.4, 166.6 and 170.6 mL, respectively, all p < 0.001); 44 μg 
produced a sub-therapeutic response. At doses ≥88 μg, more than 80% of patients 
achieved at least a 100-mL increase from baseline FEV1 in the first 4 h post 
dose compared with 33% of placebo patients. For doses ≥88 μg, D28 24 h weighted 
mean differences from placebo for FEV1 were numerically similar to respective 
trough FEV1 values, indicating bronchodilation was sustained for 24 h post dose. 
Doses ≥88 μg reduced the average number of albuterol puffs/day by more than one 
puff/day. The 350 μg dose did not demonstrate additional efficacy over that 
observed with 175 μg revefenacin. Revefenacin was generally well tolerated, with 
minimal reports of systemic anti-cholinergic effects.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that 88 and 175 μg revefenacin are appropriate 
doses for use in longer-term safety and efficacy trials. Revefenacin offers the 
potential for the first once-daily LAMA for nebulization in patients with COPD 
who require or prefer a nebulized drug delivery option.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02040792 . Registered January 16, 
2014.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0647-1
PMCID: PMC5667509
PMID: 29096627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
protocol and all amendments were approved by local review boards, ethics 
committees and health authorities at each of the 41 study centers. All patients 
provided written informed consent. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: KP has no disclosures. CB, EM and BH are employees of the 
Theravance Biopharma group of companies. EK is a consultant for Amphastar, Astra 
Zeneca, Forest, Mylan, Novartis, Sunovion, Teva and Theravance Biopharma. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


46. Chest. 2017 Feb;151(2):340-357. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.11.028. Epub 2016 Dec 
1.

Efficacy and Safety of Glycopyrrolate/Formoterol Metered Dose Inhaler Formulated 
Using Co-Suspension Delivery Technology in Patients With COPD.

Martinez FJ(1), Rabe KF(2), Ferguson GT(3), Fabbri LM(4), Rennard S(5), Feldman 
GJ(6), Sethi S(7), Spangenthal S(8), Gottschlich GM(9), Rodriguez-Roisin R(10), 
Arora S(11), Siler TM(12), Siddiqui S(13), Darken P(14), Fischer T(15), Maes 
A(14), Golden M(16), Orevillo C(17), Reisner C(17).

Author information:
(1)Joan and Sanford Weill Department of Internal Medicine, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York, NY. Electronic address: fjm2003@med.cornell.edu.
(2)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Grosshansdorf, Germany; and Department of 
Medicine, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, NOCSAE, 
Modena, Italy.
(5)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE.
(6)Clinical Discovery Unit, Early Clinical Development, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, 
UK; and S. Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, North Grove Medical Park, 
Spartanburg, SC.
(7)Department of Medicine, University at Buffalo, SUNY, Buffalo, NY.
(8)Charlotte Lung and Health, American Health Research, Inc., Charlotte, NC.
(9)New Horizons Clinical Research, Cincinnati, OH.
(10)Servei de Pneumologia, Institut Clinic Respiratori, Hospital Clínic; and 
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Aventiv Research, Columbus, OH.
(12)Midwest Chest Consultants, St. Charles, MO.
(13)Respiratory, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD (former employee of Pearl 
Therapeutics, Inc.).
(14)Biostatistics, Pearl Therapeutics, Inc., Morristown, NJ.
(15)Regulatory Affairs, Pearl Therapeutics, Inc., Durham, NC.
(16)Regulatory Affairs and Quality, Pearl Therapeutics, Inc., Durham, NC.
(17)Clinical Development, Pearl Therapeutics, Inc., Morristown, NJ.

Erratum in
    Chest. 2017 Jun;151(6):1410.

BACKGROUND: long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting beta-agonist 
(LABA) combinations are a treatment option for patients with COPD who continue 
to have symptoms despite treatment with a LAMA or a LABA alone. The Efficacy and 
Safety of PT003, PT005, and PT001 in Subjects with Moderate-to-Very Severe COPD 
(PINNACLE-1) (NCT01854645) and the Multi-Center Study to Assess the Efficacy and 
Safety of PT003, PT005, and PT001 in Subjects with Moderate-to-Very Severe COPD 
(PINNACLE-2) (NCT01854658) trials investigated the efficacy and safety of a 
novel glycopyrrolate [GP]/formoterol [FF] 18/9.6-μg (GFF) metered dose inhaler 
(MDI) formulated using the Co-Suspension Delivery Technology in patients with 
moderate-to-very severe COPD.
METHODS: These two phase III trials took place over 24 weeks and were 
randomized, double blind, and placebo controlled; 2,103 and 1,615 patients 
(40-80 years of age), respectively, were randomized. Patients received GFF MDI, 
GP MDI 18 μg, FF MDI 9.6 μg, or placebo MDI (all twice daily), or tiotropium 18 
μg dry powder inhaler (once daily in PINNACLE-1 only [open-label active 
comparator]). Efficacy and safety were assessed.
RESULTS: At week 24, differences in change from baseline in the morning predose 
trough FEV1 for GFF MDI vs placebo MDI, GP MDI, and FF MDI were 150 mL, 59 mL, 
and 64 mL in PINNACLE-1 (all P < .0001) and 103 mL, 54 mL, and 56 mL in 
PINNACLE-2 (all P < .001), respectively. There were no significant safety 
findings (incidence of adverse events was similar between treatment arms).
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that GFF MDI 18/9.6 μg demonstrated superiority over 
placebo and monocomponent MDIs and was well tolerated, thus providing an 
additional treatment option for patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: NCT01854645 and No. NCT01854658; URL: 
www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.11.028
PMID: 27916620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;13:1753466619894502. doi: 
10.1177/1753466619894502.

Systematic review and network meta-analysis of the efficacy and safety of 
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler in comparison with other 
long acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting β(2)-agonist fixed-dose 
combinations in COPD.

Siddiqui MK(1), Shukla P(2), Jenkins M(3), Ouwens M(4), Guranlioglu D(3), Darken 
P(5), Biswas M(6).

Author information:
(1)Parexel International, Punjab, India.
(2)Formerly of Parexel International, Punjab, India.
(3)AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(4)AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(6)AstraZeneca 101 Orchard Ridge Dr, Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dual bronchodilation with a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA)/long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) fixed-dose combination (FDC) is an 
established treatment strategy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
The relative efficacy and safety of glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered 
dose inhaler (GFF MDI 18/9.6 μg) in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD, 
compared with other licensed LAMA/LABA FDCs, was investigated using an 
integrated Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA).
METHODS: A systematic literature review and subsequent screening process 
identified randomized controlled trials of ⩾10 weeks' duration that enrolled 
patients aged ⩾40 years with moderate-to-very severe COPD and included at least 
one LAMA/LABA FDC or open LAMA + LABA treatment arm. NMAs were conducted for 
outcomes including change from baseline in forced expiratory volume in 1 s 
(FEV1), St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), and transition dyspnea 
index (TDI) parameters, annualized rate of exacerbations, use of rescue 
medication, adverse events, and all-cause withdrawals. Meta-regression and 
sensitivity analyses accounted for heterogeneity across studies.
RESULTS: In total, 29 studies including 34,617 patients contributed to the NMA 
for efficacy or safety outcomes at week 24 or exacerbations. For all LAMA/LABA 
FDCs with data available, significantly greater improvements in FEV1 [trough, 
peak, and area under the curve (AUC)0-4], SGRQ total score and TDI focal score 
at week 24, and annualized rate of moderate-to-severe exacerbations, were 
observed versus placebo. Where indirect comparisons were possible, differences 
between GFF MDI and other LAMA/LABA FDCs were small relative to established 
margins of clinical relevance, and not statistically significant. The safety and 
tolerability profile of GFF MDI was consistent with other LAMA/LABA FDCs and 
placebo. The results of the meta-regression were generally similar to the base 
case.
CONCLUSIONS: GFF MDI demonstrated comparable efficacy and safety outcomes to 
other LAMA/LABA FDCs. Personalization of treatment choice within the class on 
the basis of other factors such as patient preference may be appropriate.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466619894502
PMCID: PMC6928544
PMID: 31868101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: MKS is an 
employee of Parexel, and PS is a former employee of Parexel, the organization 
that received funding from AstraZeneca to perform the systematic literature 
review and network meta-analysis. MJ, MO, DG, PD, and MB are employees of 
AstraZeneca. MJ, DG, and PD hold stock or stock options in AstraZeneca.


48. COPD. 2017 Dec;14(6):648-662. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2017.1389875. Epub 2017 Nov 
9.

Triple Therapy in COPD: What We Know and What We Don't.

Calverley PMA(1), Magnussen H(2), Miravitlles M(3), Wedzicha JA(4).

Author information:
(1)a School of Ageing and Chronic Disease , University of Liverpool , Liverpool 
, UK.
(2)b Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf , Airway Research 
Center North, German Centre for Lung Research , Grosshansdorf , Germany.
(3)c Pneumology Department , Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron. CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES) , Barcelona , Spain.
(4)d Airways Disease Section , National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial 
College London , London , UK.

Triple inhaled therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) consists 
of an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) and a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) taken in combination. Triple therapy is 
recommended by the Global initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
for patients who experience recurrent exacerbations despite treatment with 
either a dual bronchodilator (preferred initial therapy) or LABA/ICS combination 
(alternative initial therapy). Although there is evidence for the greater 
efficacy of triple therapy compared with LABA/ICS and LAMA monotherapy with 
regards to improved lung function, health status, and exacerbation rate, the 
efficacy of triple therapy when compared with dual bronchodilation (LABA/LAMA) 
is as yet unknown. As ICS use is associated with an increased risk of developing 
pneumonia, it is important to assess the risk/benefit ratio of triple therapy on 
an individual basis, and identify patients most likely to benefit. The role of 
elevated blood eosinophils as a biomarker for the identification of candidates 
for ICS treatment is currently debated, and further prospective evidence is 
required. This review assesses evidence for the efficacy and safety of triple 
therapy and postulates on the prospective evidence from ongoing studies. The 
potential for treating patients who experience further exacerbations on dual 
bronchodilation according to phenotype is also considered, as well as withdrawal 
of ICS from triple therapy in patients who are unlikely to benefit.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2017.1389875
PMID: 29120273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Ann Pharmacother. 2017 Dec;51(12):1063-1068. doi: 10.1177/1060028017723349. Epub 
2017 Jul 31.

Adherence and Persistence to long acting beta agonistss Treatment Episodes in 
Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Savaria F(1), Beauchesne MF(1)(2)(3), Forget A(1)(4), Blais L(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)1 Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)2 Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.
(3)3 Endowment Pharmaceutical Chair AstraZeneca in Respiratory Health, Montreal, 
Québec, Canada.
(4)4 Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: No studies have examined adherence or persistence to long-acting 
anticholinergics (LAAC) treatment episodes in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: To estimate 1-year adherence and 5-year persistence to LAAC during 
treatment episodes, and the likelihood of initiating a subsequent treatment 
episode.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort of LAAC-treated COPD patients was reconstructed 
from Quebec databases. A treatment episode was initiated at cohort entry, 
defined as the first LAAC prescription date on/after the first COPD diagnosis 
date recorded between October 1, 2003, and March 31, 2014. We identified a 
subsequent treatment episode up to 5 years after the end of the episode 
initiated at cohort entry. We measured adherence as the proportion of days 
covered over 1 year. Persistence was defined as prescription renewal within 90 
days of the previous prescription and was plotted using Kaplan-Meier curves over 
5 years. The 5-year hazard and cumulative incidence of initiating a subsequent 
episode were estimated with survival analyses. We compared adherence and 
persistence between the treatment episodes using t and log-rank tests.
RESULTS: The cohort included 113 435 COPD patients. Adherence and persistence to 
LAAC were significantly lower in the subsequent treatment episode (55% vs 63%; P 
< 0.0001). The likelihood of initiating a subsequent episode was greatest 
immediately after the cessation of the initial episode, with 59% of patients 
starting a subsequent episode within 1 year.
CONCLUSION: Adherence and persistence to LAAC were lower in the subsequent 
treatment episode. Interventions should be offered quickly after LAAC cessation.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028017723349
PMID: 28760010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Respir Res. 2017 Nov 25;18(1):196. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0683-x.

Efficacy and safety of tiotropium and olodaterol in COPD: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis.

Miravitlles M(1), Urrutia G(2), Mathioudakis AG(3), Ancochea J(4).

Author information:
(1)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron., P. Vall d'Hebron 
119-129, ES-08035, Barcelona, Spain. mmiravitlles@vhebron.net.
(2)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica Sant Pau (IIB Sant Pau). CIBER de 
Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital 
of South Manchester, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(4)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, Instituto de 
Investigación Hospital Universitario de la Princesa (IISP) Universidad Autónoma 
de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators are the cornerstone of pharmacologic 
treatment of COPD. The new combination of long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) tiotropium (TIO) and long acting beta-agonists (LABA) olodaterol (OLO) 
has been introduced as fist line therapy for COPD. This article analyses the 
evidence of efficacy and safety of the TIO/OLO combination.
METHODS: A systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials 
(RCT) with a period of treatment of at least 6 weeks, in patients with COPD 
confirmed by spirometry, comparing combined treatment with TIO/OLO (approved 
doses only), with any of the mono-components or any other active comparator 
administered as an inhalator.
RESULTS: A total of 10 Randomized controlled trials (RCT) were identified 
(N = 10,918). TIO/OLO significantly improved trough FEV1 from baseline to week 
12 versus TIO, OLO and LABA/ICS (0.06 L, 0.09 L and between 0.04 and 0.05 L, 
respectively). TIO/OLO improved transitional dyspnea index (TDI) and St. 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) compared with mono-components, with 
patients more likely to achieve clinically important improvements in TDI (risk 
ratio [RR]: 1.17, 95% confidence interval [CI]: [1.07, 1.28] versus TIO and RR: 
1.14, 95%CI: [1.01, 1.28] versus OLO) and in SGRQ (RR: 1.21, 95%CI: [1.12, 1.30] 
versus TIO and RR: 1.28, 95%CI: [1.18, 1.40] versus OLO). Patients treated with 
TIO/OLO showed a significant reduction in the use of rescue medication and no 
significant differences in frequency of general and serious adverse events were 
observed between TIO/OLO and mono-components.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with TIO/OLO provided significant improvements in lung 
function versus mono-components and LABA/ICS with more patients achieving 
significant improvements in dyspnea and health status. No differences in adverse 
events were observed compared with other active treatments.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: PROSPERO register of systematic reviews ( 
CRD42016040162 ).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0683-x
PMCID: PMC5702233
PMID: 29178871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: Marc 
Miravitlles has received speaker fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini, Teva, Grifols and Novartis, and consulting 
fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Gebro Pharma, CLS Behring, 
Cipla, MediImmune, Mereo Biopharma, Teva, Novartis and Grifols. Gerard Urrútia 
has received fees from GlaxoSmithKline and Novartis for participating in 
educational activities (workshops). Alexander G. Mathioudakis has not conflict 
of interest. Julio Ancochea has received speaker fees and/or consulting fees 
from Actelion, Air Liquide, Almirall, Astra-Zeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, 
Carburos Médica, Chiesi, Faes Farma, Ferrer, Glaxo-SmithKline, InterMune, Linde 
Healthcare, Menarini, MSD, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Rovi, Sandoz, 
Takeda and Teva. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard 
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


51. Clin Respir J. 2019 Jul;13(7):413-428. doi: 10.1111/crj.13026. Epub 2019 May 2.

Triple versus dual inhaler therapy in moderate-to-severe COPD: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Zayed Y(1), Barbarawi M(1), Kheiri B(1), Haykal T(1), Chahine A(1), Rashdan 
L(1), Hamid K(1), Sundus S(1), Banifadel M(2), Aburahma A(1), Bachuwa G(1), 
Chandran A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hurley Medical Center, Michigan State 
University, Flint, Michigan.
(2)Internal Medicine Department, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio.
(3)Pulmonary and Critical Care Department, Hurley Medical Center, Michigan State 
University, Flint, Michigan.

INTRODUCTION: Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is 
evolving specially with triple inhaler therapy.
OBJECTIVES: To perform a meta-analysis to ascertain the safety and efficacy of 
triple inhaler therapy consisting of an inhaled-glucocorticoid (ICS), 
long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA) 
when compared with dual therapy (ICS-LABA or LAMA-LABA).
METHODS: We performed an electronic database search to include randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) comparing between triple and dual inhalers. Pooled 
rate-ratio (RR) or odds-ratio (OR) for dichotomous data and weighted mean 
difference (MD) for continuous data were calculated with their corresponding 95% 
confidence interval (CI).
RESULTS: Our study included 12 RCTs totaling 19,322 patients, mean age of 
65 ± 8.2 years and 68.2% were male. Pooled analysis demonstrated a significant 
reduction in moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbations with triple therapy (RR 0.75; 
95% CI 0.69-0.83; P < 0.01). Additionally, triple therapy caused significant 
increase in trough FEV1 (MD 0.09 L; 95% CI 0.07-0.12; P < 0.01), significant 
reduction in the mean St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) score (MD 
-1.67; 95% CI -2.02- -1.31; P < 0.01), and more patients experienced ≥ 4 points 
reduction of SGRQ score (OR 1.27; 95% CI 1.19-1.35; P < 0.01). Triple therapy 
was associated with an increased risk of pneumonia when compared to LABA/LAMA 
(OR 1.25; 95% 1.03-1.97; P = 0.03) but there were no significant differences in 
other adverse events between triple and dual inhalers.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, triple inhaler therapy 
was associated with a reduction of moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbations, 
improved lung function and improved quality of life when compared to dual 
inhaler therapy but with an increased pneumonia risk.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13026
PMID: 30947394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Eur Respir J. 2018 Oct 4;52(4):1701247. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01247-2017. Print 
2018 Oct.

The mode of action of anticholinergics in asthma.

Gosens R(1), Gross N(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)University Medical Research LLC, St Francis Hospital, Hartford, CT, USA.

Acetylcholine binds to muscarinic receptors to play a key role in the 
pathophysiology of asthma, leading to bronchoconstriction, increased mucus 
secretion, inflammation and airway remodelling. Anticholinergics are muscarinic 
receptor antagonists that are used in the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease and asthma. Recent in vivo and in vitro data have increased 
our understanding of how acetylcholine contributes to the disease manifestations 
of asthma, as well as elucidating the mechanism of action of anticholinergics. 
This review assesses the latest literature on acetylcholine in asthma 
pathophysiology, with a closer look at its role in airway inflammation and 
remodelling. New insights into the mechanism of action of anticholinergics, 
their effects on airway remodelling, and a review of the efficacy and safety of 
long acting beta agonistss in asthma treatment will also be covered, including 
a summary of the latest clinical trial data.

Copyright ©ERS 2018.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.01247-2017
PMCID: PMC6340638
PMID: 30115613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: R. Gosens reports grants 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Aquilo and Novartis, and editorial support 
(in the form of writing assistance, assembling tables and figures, collating 
author comments, grammatical editing and referencing) from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
during the conduct of the study. Conflict of interest: N. Gross reports 
editorial support (in the form of writing assistance, assembling tables and 
figures, collating author comments, grammatical editing and referencing) from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, during the conduct of the study.


53. Respirology. 2018 Jun;23(6):583-592. doi: 10.1111/resp.13235. Epub 2017 Dec 18.

Patterns of use of long-acting bronchodilators in patients with COPD: A 
nationwide follow-up study of new users in New Zealand.

Parkin L(1)(2), Barson D(1)(2), Zeng J(1)(2), Horsburgh S(1)(2), Sharples 
K(1)(3)(4), Dummer J(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacoepidemiology Research Network, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand.
(2)Department of Preventive and Social Medicine, Dunedin School of Medicine, 
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Medicine, Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand.
(4)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: While several studies have found that prescribing 
practices do not conform to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
treatment guidelines, none have examined longitudinal patterns of use of 
long-acting beta2 -agonist (LABA) and long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
therapy across an entire country. We undertook a nationwide follow-up study to 
describe treatment patterns in new users of long-acting bronchodilators.
METHODS: National health and pharmaceutical dispensing data were used to 
identify patients aged ≥45 years who initiated LABA and/or LAMA therapy for COPD 
between 1 February 2006 and 31 December 2013. Dispensings of LABAs, LAMAs and 
inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) were aggregated into episodes of use of 
therapeutic regimens. Kaplan-Meier curves, sunburst plots and sequence index 
plots were generated to summarize, respectively, the duration of the first 
regimen, the sequences in which unique regimens were used and the patterns of 
use and non-use during follow-up.
RESULTS: The study cohort included 83 435 patients with 290 400 person-years of 
follow-up. The most commonly initiated regimen was a LABA with an ICS. ICS use 
was inconsistent with international guidelines: over- and under-treatment 
occurred in patients with infrequent and frequent exacerbations, respectively, 
and ICS monotherapy was common. The median duration of the first regimen was 
46 days. Many patients used multiple regimens over time and periods of non-use 
were common.
CONCLUSION: In this nationwide study, patterns of use of LABAs, LAMAs and ICSs 
were complex and often did not comply with treatment guidelines. Further work is 
required to address the discrepancy between guidelines and prescribing 
practices.

© 2017 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13235
PMID: 29265705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Dec 12;12:3557-3565. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S151909. eCollection 2017.

Predicting treatable traits for long-acting bronchodilators in patients with 
stable COPD.

Kang J(#)(1), Kim KT(#)(2), Lee JH(3), Kim EK(3), Kim TH(4), Yoo KH(5), Lee 
JS(1), Kim WJ(6), Kim JH(2), Oh YM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul.
(2)Seoul National University Biomedical Informatics and Systems Biomedical 
Informatics Research Center, Division of Biomedical Informatics, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, 
Seongnam.
(4)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Hanyang University 
Guri Hospital, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Guri.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Konkuk University Hospital, Konkuk 
University School of Medicine, Seoul.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine and Environmental Health Center, Kangwon 
National University Hospital, School of Medicine, Kangwon National University, 
Chuncheon, South Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: There is currently no measure to predict a treatability of long-acting 
β-2 agonist (LABA) or long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We aimed to build prediction 
models for the treatment response to these bronchodilators, in order to 
determine the most responsive medication for patients with COPD.
METHODS: We performed a prospective open-label crossover study, in which each 
long-acting bronchodilator was given in a random order to 65 patients with 
stable COPD for 4 weeks, with a 4-week washout period in between. We analyzed 14 
baseline clinical traits, expression profiles of 31,426 gene transcripts, and 
damaged-gene scores of 6,464 genes acquired from leukocytes. The gene expression 
profiles were measured by RNA microarray and the damaged-gene scores were 
obtained after DNA exome sequencing. Linear regression analyses were performed 
to build prediction models after using factor and correlation analyses.
RESULTS: Using a prediction model for a LABA, traits found associated with the 
treatment response were post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 
second, bronchodilator reversibility (BDR) to salbutamol, expression of three 
genes (CLN8, PCSK5, and SKP2), and damage scores of four genes (EPG5, FNBP4, 
SCN10A, and SPTBN5) (R2=0.512, p<0.001). Traits associated with the treatment 
response to a LAMA were COPD assessment test score, BDR, expression of four 
genes (C1orf115, KIAA1618, PRKX, and RHOQ) and damage scores of three genes 
(FBN3, FDFT1, and ZBED6) (R2=0.575, p<0.001). The prediction models consisting 
only of clinical traits appeared too weak to predict the treatment response, 
with R2=0.231 for the LABA model and R2=0.121 for the LAMA model.
CONCLUSION: Adding the expressions of genes and damaged-gene scores to the 
clinical traits may improve the predictability of treatment response to 
long-acting bronchodilators.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S151909
PMCID: PMC5732547
PMID: 29263660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


55. COPD. 2016 Dec;13(6):677-685. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2016.1170799. Epub 2016 May 
5.

long acting muscarinic Antagonist Versus Inhaled Corticosteroid when Added to 
Long-acting β-agonist for COPD: A Meta-analysis.

Oba Y(1), Chandran AV(1), Devasahayam JV(1).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Environmental Medicine, School of 
Medicine, University of Missouri , Columbia , Missouri , USA.

The purpose of this study was to systematically review the efficacy and safety 
of long-acting β-agonist/long acting muscarinic antagonist (LABA/LAMA) and 
LABA/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) combinations in patients with advanced chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Randomized clinical trials of at least 
12 weeks of duration comparing LABA/LAMA and LABA/ICS combinations were 
included. We chose forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), St. George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) score, Transitional Dyspnea Index (TDI), COPD 
Assessment Test (CAT) score, COPD exacerbations, mortality, and other safety 
parameters as outcome assessment criteria. We included six randomized controlled 
trials with a total of 4,319 patients. Most patients did not have a history of 
exacerbation. LABA/LAMA was associated with greater improvement in FEV1 than 
LABA/ICS (mean difference (MD) 0.09L, 95%confidence interval (CI) 0.07 to 0.11L; 
high certainty). Two treatments appeared clinically equivalent in improving SGRQ 
(MD -0.12, 95%CI -1.16 to 0.92; high certainty), TDI (MD 0.15, 95%CI -0.05 to 
0.35; high certainty), and CAT scores (MD 0.28 95%CI -0.29 to 0.85; moderate 
certainty). LABA/LAMA was associated with an absolute reduction of approximately 
8% in the incidence of pneumonia compared with LABA/ICS (risk ratio 0.41, 95%CI 
0.18 to 0.94; moderate certainty). There was no significant difference in safety 
and exacerbation outcomes. However, equivalence of two treatments could not be 
concluded due to imprecision especially for mortality, cardiac serious adverse 
events, and severe exacerbations. Our findings support the use of dual 
long-acting bronchodilators for patients with advanced COPD but without frequent 
exacerbations given the excess risk of pneumonia with LABA/ICS.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2016.1170799
PMID: 27148815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Feb;9(1):3-15. doi: 10.1177/1753465814565624.

Comparative efficacy of long acting muscarinic antagonists in preventing COPD 
exacerbations: a network meta-analysis and meta-regression.

Oba Y, Lone NA.

BACKGROUND: We hypothesized a class effect of currently available long-acting 
muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs; i.e., tiotropium as a dry powder inhaler or a 
soft mist inhaler, aclidinium bromide, and glycopyrronium) in preventing chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. The hypothesis was tested 
with a network meta-analysis.
METHODS: Several databases and manufacturer’s websites were searched for 
relevant clinical trials. Randomized, controlled trials, of at least 12 weeks 
duration, comparing a LAMA with placebo or another LAMA were included. 
Moderate-to-severe and severe exacerbations were chosen as the outcome 
assessment criteria. The data were pooled using network meta-analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 27 studies with 48,140 subjects were included. All LAMAs 
reduced moderate-to-severe exacerbations compared with placebo. However, there 
were no statistically significant differences in preventing moderate-to-severe 
or severe exacerbations among LABAs. In a subgroup analysis restricting studies 
to those that had a minimum of 6 months of treatment, glycopyrronium was 
associated with the least-effective strategy and aclidinium was associated with 
the greatest probability of being the best therapy in preventing severe 
exacerbations. Our meta-regression analysis suggested that the prevention of 
COPD exacerbations were less effective in studies which allowed concomitant use 
of a long-acting beta agonist (LABA).
CONCLUSION: All LAMAs were equally effective in preventing moderate-to-severe 
exacerbations. Aclidinium was associated with the lowest risk for severe 
exacerbations when treatment duration was 6 months or longer. The concomitant 
use of LABA may not enhance the efficacy of LAMAs in preventing COPD 
exacerbations. More studies are needed to further examine above findings.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465814565624
PMID: 25586493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2018 Feb;48:111-116. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.10.011. Epub 
2017 Oct 21.

Treatment with long acting muscarinic antagonists stimulates serum levels of 
irisin in patients with COPD.

Mandal J(1), Roth M(1), Papakonstantinou E(1), Sun Q(1), Costa L(1), Boeck L(1), 
Scherr A(1), Rakic J(1), Louis R(2), Milenkovic B(3), Boersma W(4), Kostikas 
K(5), Blasi F(6), Aerts J(7), Rohde G(8), Lacoma A(9), Torres A(10), Welte 
T(11), Tamm M(1), Stolz D(12).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Pulmonary Medicine, University Hospital Basel and Respiratory Cell 
Research, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Pneumology, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium.
(3)Pneumology, Institute for Pulmonary Diseases, Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Northwest Hospital Group, Alkmaar, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Pneumology, Medical School, University of Thessaly, Greece.
(6)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Cardio-thoracic Unit and Cystic Fibrosis Adult Center Fondazione IRCCS 
Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Milano, Italy.
(7)Pneumology, Amphia Hospital, Breda, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Center, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(9)Microbiology, Hospital Universitari Germans Trais i Pujol, Badalona, Spain; 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, CIBER Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES) 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain.
(10)Pneumology, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Pneumology, Medizinische Hochschule, Hannover, Germany.
(12)Clinic of Pulmonary Medicine, University Hospital Basel and Respiratory Cell 
Research, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: daiana.stolz@usb.ch.

Long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) are currently considered the 
therapeutic mainstay for patients with COPD and have been shown to improve 
clinical outcomes including symptoms, exercise capacity and airflow limitation. 
Irisin, is a newly discovered hormone-like myokine generated by skeletal muscle 
cells in response to exercise and it is suggested to regulate energy expenditure 
and exercise capacity. The aim of the present study was to investigate if 
treatment with LAMA alters serum irisin levels in patients with COPD. Irisin was 
assessed by ELISA in the serum of 506 patients with COPD, GOLD II-IV, with a 
smoking history >10 PY, who were included in the PROMISE-COPD cohort. The effect 
of inhaled LAMA on serum irisin levels was evaluated in a proof-of-concept 
cohort of 40 COPD patients. Univariate linear regression analysis revealed that 
there was a significant negative association of irisin with age-adjusted 
Charlson score (p = 0.003) and a positive association of irisin with 6-min 
walking distance (6MWD) (p = 0.018) and treatment with LAMA (p = 0.004) but not 
with LABA or ICS. Multivariate analysis revealed that the association of irisin 
with LAMA treatment remains significant after adjustment for age-adjusted score 
and 6MWD. In the proof-of-concept cohort a single inhalation of LAMA stimulated 
serum irisin levels after 4 h. These findings imply that treatment of COPD 
patients with LAMA increase circulating irisin, thus explaining some of the 
beneficial extra-pulmonary effects of these drugs when used in the treatment of 
COPD.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.10.011
PMID: 29066215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2015 Apr;116(4):291-307. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.12366. 
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Diagnosis and pharmacotherapy of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 
the finnish guidelines.

Kankaanranta H(1), Harju T, Kilpeläinen M, Mazur W, Lehto JT, Katajisto M, Peisa 
T, Meinander T, Lehtimäki L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Seinäjoki Central Hospital, Seinäjoki, 
Finland; Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere, 
Finland.

The Finnish Medical Society Duodecim initiated and managed the update of the 
Finnish national guideline for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The 
Finnish COPD guideline was revised to acknowledge the progress in diagnosis and 
management of COPD. This Finnish COPD guideline in English language is a part of 
the original guideline and focuses on the diagnosis, assessment and 
pharmacotherapy of stable COPD. It is intended to be used mainly in primary 
health care but not forgetting respiratory specialists and other healthcare 
workers. The new recommendations and statements are based on the best evidence 
available from the medical literature, other published national guidelines and 
the GOLD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease) report. This 
guideline introduces the diagnostic approach, differential diagnostics towards 
asthma, assessment and treatment strategy to control symptoms and to prevent 
exacerbations. The pharmacotherapy is based on the symptoms and a clinical 
phenotype of the individual patient. The guideline defines three clinically 
relevant phenotypes including the low and high exacerbation risk phenotypes and 
the neglected asthma-COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS). These clinical phenotypes can 
help clinicians to identify patients that respond to specific pharmacological 
interventions. For the low exacerbation risk phenotype, pharmacotherapy with 
short-acting beta -agonists (salbutamol, terbutaline) or anticholinergics 
(ipratropium) or their combination (fenoterol-ipratropium) is recommended in 
patients with less symptoms. If short-acting bronchodilators are not enough to 
control symptoms, a long-acting beta -agonist (formoterol, indacaterol, olodaterol 
or salmeterol) or a long acting beta agonists (muscarinic receptor 
antagonists; aclidinium, glycopyrronium, tiotropium, umeclidinium) or their 
combination is recommended. For the high exacerbation risk phenotype, 
pharmacotherapy with a long acting beta agonists or a fixed combination of an 
inhaled glucocorticoid and a long-acting beta -agonist (budesonide-formoterol, 
beclomethasone dipropionate-formoterol, fluticasone propionate-salmeterol or 
fluticasone furoate-vilanterol) is recommended as a first choice. Other 
treatment options for this phenotype include combination of long-acting 
bronchodilators given from separate inhalers or as a fixed combination 
(glycopyrronium-indacaterol or umeclidinium-vilanterol) or a triple combination 
of an inhaled glucocorticoid, a long-acting beta -agonist and a long-acting 
anticholinergic. If the patient has severe-to-very severe COPD (FEV1  < 50% 
predicted), chronic bronchitis and frequent exacerbations despite long-acting 
bronchodilators, the pharmacotherapy may include also roflumilast. ACOS is a 
phenotype of COPD in which there are features that comply with both asthma and 
COPD. Patients belonging to this phenotype have usually been excluded from 
studies evaluating the effects of drugs both in asthma and in COPD. Thus, 
evidence-based recommendation of treatment cannot be given. The treatment should 
cover both diseases. Generally, the therapy should include at least inhaled 
glucocorticoids (beclomethasone dipropionate, budesonide, ciclesonide, 
fluticasone furoate, fluticasone propionate or mometasone) combined with a 
long-acting bronchodilator (beta -agonist or anticholinergic or both).

© 2014 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT 
(former Nordic Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.12366
PMCID: PMC4409821
PMID: 25515181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017 Jul 15;196(2):139-149. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201609-1794CI.

How Do Dual Long-Acting Bronchodilators Prevent Exacerbations of Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease?

Beeh KM(1), Burgel PR(2), Franssen FME(3), Lopez-Campos JL(4)(5), Loukides S(6), 
Hurst JR(7), Fležar M(8), Ulrik CS(9), Di Marco F(10), Stolz D(11), Valipour 
A(12), Casserly B(13)(14), Ställberg B(15), Kostikas K(16), Wedzicha JA(17).

Author information:
(1)1 insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(2)2 Department of Respiratory Diseases and Adult Cystic Fibrosis Centre, 
Hôpital Cochin, AP-HP and Paris Descartes University, Paris, France.
(3)3 Department of Research and Education, Centre of Expertise for Chronic Organ 
Failure, Horn, the Netherlands.
(4)4 Unidad Médico-Quirúrgica de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de 
Biomedicina de Sevilla, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain.
(5)5 Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias, 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(6)6 2nd Respiratory Medicine Department, National and Kapodistrian University 
of Athens Medical School, Attiko University Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(7)7 University College London Respiratory, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(8)8 University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases, Golnik, Slovenia.
(9)9 Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)10 Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Università degli Studi di Milano, 
Ospedale San Paolo, Milan, Italy.
(11)11 Clinic of Respiratory Medicine and Pulmonary Cell Research, University 
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(12)12 Ludwig-Boltzmann-Institute for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease and 
Respiratory Epidemiology, Otto-Wagner-Spital, Vienna, Austria.
(13)13 University Hospital, Limerick, Ireland.
(14)14 Graduate Entry Medical School, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland.
(15)15 Department of Public Health and Caring Science, Family Medicine and 
Preventive Medicine, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(16)16 Novartis, Basel, Switzerland; and.
(17)17 Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial 
College London, London, United Kingdom.

Decreasing the frequency and severity of exacerbations is one of the main goals 
of treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Several 
studies have documented that long-acting bronchodilators can reduce exacerbation 
rate and/or severity, and others have shown that combinations of long-acting 
beta-adrenergic agonists (LABAs) and long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) 
provide greater reductions in exacerbation frequency than either their 
monocomponents or LABA/inhaled corticosteroid combinations in patients at low 
and high risk for these events. In this review, small groups of experts 
critically evaluated mechanisms potentially responsible for the increased 
benefit of LABA/LAMA combinations over single long-acting bronchodilators or 
LABA/inhaled corticosteroids in decreasing exacerbation. These included effects 
on lung hyperinflation and mechanical stress, inflammation, excessive mucus 
production with impaired mucociliary clearance, and symptom severity. The data 
assembled and analyzed by each group were reviewed by all authors and combined 
into this manuscript. Available clinical results support the possibility that 
effects of LABA/LAMA combinations on hyperinflation, mucociliary clearance, and 
symptom severity may all contribute to decreasing exacerbations. Although 
preclinical studies suggest LABAs and LAMAs have antiinflammatory effects, such 
effects have not been demonstrated yet in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201609-1794CI
PMID: 27922741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2018 Jan;247:116-125. doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2017.10.001. 
Epub 2017 Oct 7.

Sensory-mechanical effects of a dual bronchodilator and its anticholinergic 
component in COPD.

O'Donnell DE(1), Elbehairy AF(2), Faisal A(3), Neder JA(4), Webb KA(4); Canadian 
Respiratory Research Network (CRRN).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Investigation Unit, Department of Medicine, Queen's University & 
Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: 
odonnell@queensu.ca.
(2)Respiratory Investigation Unit, Department of Medicine, Queen's University & 
Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, Ontario, Canada; Department of Chest 
Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt.
(3)Respiratory Investigation Unit, Department of Medicine, Queen's University & 
Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, Ontario, Canada; Faculty of Physical 
Education for Men, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt.
(4)Respiratory Investigation Unit, Department of Medicine, Queen's University & 
Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

This randomized, double-blind, crossover study examined the physiological 
rationale for using a dual long-acting bronchodilator (umeclidinium/vilanterol 
(UME/VIL)) versus its muscarinic-antagonist component (UME) as treatment for 
dyspnea and exercise intolerance in moderate COPD. After each 4-week treatment 
period, subjects performed pulmonary function and symptom-limited constant-work 
rate cycling tests with diaphragm electromyogram (EMGdi), esophageal (Pes), 
gastric (Pga) and transdiaphragmatic (Pdi) pressure measurements. Fourteen 
subjects completed the study. Both treatments improved spirometry and airway 
resistance. UME/VIL had larger increases in FEV1 (+0.14±0.23L, p<0.05) but no 
added reduction in lung hyperinflation compared with UME. Isotime during 
exercise after UME/VIL versus UME (p<0.05): "unpleasantness of breathing" fell 
0.8±1.3 Borg units; mean expiratory flow and ventilation increased; Pdi and Pga 
decreased. There were no treatment differences in endurance time, breathing 
pattern, operating lung volumes, inspiratory neural drive (EMGdi) or respiratory 
muscle effort (Pes swings) during exercise. UME/VIL compared with UME was 
associated with reduced breathing unpleasantness reflecting improved airway and 
respiratory muscle function during exercise.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2017.10.001
PMID: 28993264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Respir Med. 2017 Jul;128:28-41. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.04.008. Epub 2017 Apr 
18.

Why choose tiotropium for my patient? A comprehensive review of actions and 
outcomes versus other bronchodilators.

Halpin DM(1), Kaplan AG(2), Russell RK(3).

Author information:
(1)Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5DW, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: d.halpin@nhs.net.
(2)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, 500 
University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, ON M5G 1V7, Canada. Electronic address: 
for4kids@gmail.com.
(3)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Headley Way, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DS, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: richard.russell@ndm.ox.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma are leading 
causes of morbidity and mortality. This narrative review provides an appraisal 
of the pharmacological and clinical characteristics of tiotropium in COPD and 
asthma, and examines how these compare with other long-acting bronchodilators. 
The evidence base is placed into context by relating it to factors affecting 
clinicians' choice of therapy.
MAIN FINDINGS: Desirable attributes of a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) maintenance therapy include effective pharmacological bronchodilation, 
improved lung function, exacerbation efficacy, and positive effects on symptom 
control, exercise capacity and quality of life across a broad patient 
population. Tolerability and convenience of use are also important for patient 
well-being and treatment adherence. Tiotropium shows higher affinity for 
muscarinic receptors than ipratropium, and prolonged binding to the M3 receptor 
compared with other LAMAs. In COPD, tiotropium has demonstrated improved lung 
function and exacerbation prevention compared with placebo or long-acting 
beta-agonists, similar exacerbation efficacy to other LAMAs, and enhanced symptom 
control and health status versus placebo. UniTinA-asthma® showed the benefits of 
add-on tiotropium in patients with uncontrolled mild to moderate and severe 
asthma. Tiotropium is well tolerated, with an incidence of adverse events 
similar to placebo, except for known infrequent side effects of 
anticholinergics. Tiotropium HandiHaler® and Respimat® augment inhaler choice in 
COPD.
PRINCIPAL CONCLUSIONS: With over 10 years' prescribing history and 50 million 
patient-years of use, tiotropium has the benefit of a more extensive clinical 
evidence base than other long-acting bronchodilators, with demonstrated efficacy 
and safety in COPD and symptomatic asthma.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.04.008
PMID: 28610667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Lancet Respir Med. 2018 May;6(5):337-344. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(18)30102-4. 
Epub 2018 Apr 5.

Tiotropium and olodaterol in the prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease exacerbations (DYNAGITO): a double-blind, randomised, parallel-group, 
active-controlled trial.

Calverley PMA(1), Anzueto AR(2), Carter K(3), Grönke L(4), Hallmann C(4), 
Jenkins C(5), Wedzicha J(6), Rabe KF(7).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Science Centre, Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University 
of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. Electronic address: pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Critical Care, University of Texas 
Health Sciences Center and South Texas Veterans' Health Care System, San 
Antonio, TX, USA.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc, Ridgefield, CT, USA.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(5)The George Institute of Global Health Sydney, Concord Clinical School, The 
University of Sydney, UNSW, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(6)Clinical Respiratory Science Division, National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College London, London, UK.
(7)LungClinic Grosshansdorf, Grosshansdorf, Germany.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2018 May;6(5):316-317.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2018 Aug;6(8):e37.

BACKGROUND: Combinations of long-acting bronchodilators are recommended to 
reduce the rate of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. 
It is unclear whether combining olodaterol, a long-acting beta-agonist, with 
tiotropium, a long-acting anti-muscarinic, reduces the rate of exacerbations 
compared with tiotropium alone.
METHODS: This 52-week, double-blind, randomised, parallel-group, 
active-controlled trial randomly assigned (1:1) patients with COPD with a 
history of exacerbations using a randomised block design to receive 
tiotropium-olodaterol 5 μg-5 μg or tiotropium 5 μg once daily. Patients using 
inhaled corticosteroids continued this therapy. Treatment was masked to 
patients, investigators, and those involved in analysing the data. The primary 
endpoint was the rate of moderate and severe COPD exacerbations from the first 
dose of medication until 1 day after last drug administration. The primary 
analysis included all randomly assigned patients who received any dose of study 
medication but were not from a site excluded due to on-site protocol violations. 
The trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02296138.
FINDINGS: Overall, 9009 patients were screened from 818 centres in 51 countries. 
We recruited 7880 patients between Jan 22, 2015 and March 7, 2016 (mean age 66·4 
years [SD 8·5], 5626 [71%] were men, mean FEV1 percent predicted 44·5% [SD 
27·7]): 3939 received tiotropium-olodaterol and 3941 tiotropium. The rate of 
moderate and severe exacerbations was lower with tiotropium-olodaterol than 
tiotropium (rate ratio [RR] 0·93, 99% CI 0·85-1·02; p=0·0498), not meeting the 
targeted 0·01 significance level. The proportion of patients reporting adverse 
events was similar between treatments.
INTERPRETATION: Combining tiotropium and olodaterol did not reduce exacerbation 
rate as much as expected compared with tiotropium alone.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(18)30102-4
PMID: 29605624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. JAMA. 2017 Oct 3;318(13):1274-1275. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.11903.

Long-Acting β-Agonists (LABA) Combined With long acting muscarinic Antagonists 
or LABA Combined With Inhaled Corticosteroids for Patients With Stable COPD.

Horita N(1), Nagashima A(1), Kaneko T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

CLINICAL QUESTION: Are inhaled long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) 
combined with long-acting β-agonists (LABA) associated with differences in the 
incidence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation and 
serious adverse events and with differences in quality of life and forced 
expiratory volume in the first second of expiration (FEV1) vs inhaled LABA plus 
inhaled corticosteroids therapy for the treatment of stable COPD?
BOTTOM LINE: Compared with inhaled LABA combined with corticosteroids, inhaled 
LAMA combined with LABA may be associated with a lower risk of COPD exacerbation 
and with greater improvement in FEV1 without differences in the incidence of 
serious severe adverse events or quality of life.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2017.11903
PMID: 28973232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Drugs. 2019 Sep;79(13):1455-1466. doi: 10.1007/s40265-019-01186-x.

Glycopyrronium/Formoterol: A Review in COPD.

Al-Salama ZT(1), Frampton JE(2).

Author information:
(1)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand. demail@springer.com.
(2)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand.

Glycopyrronium/formoterol (Bevespi Aerosphere®) is a fixed-dose combination of 
the long acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium bromide and the long-acting 
beta-agonist formoterol fumarate delivered via a pressurized metered dose inhaler 
(pMDI) and formulated using co-suspension delivery technology. It is approved in 
the USA and EU for use as maintenance treatment in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and in Japan to relieve symptoms in 
patients with COPD. In the PINNACLE trials in patients with moderate to very 
severe COPD, glycopyrronium/formoterol was associated with significantly greater 
improvements in lung function than its monocomponents and placebo at 24 weeks 
and its monocomponents and open-label tiotropium over 52 weeks. In the AERISTO 
trial, glycopyrronium/formoterol was non-inferior to umeclidinium/vilanterol dry 
powder inhaler for peak change in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) within 
2 h postdose, but not for the change in morning predose trough FEV1, over 
24 weeks. Glycopyrronium/formoterol was generally well tolerated in patients 
with moderate to very severe COPD, with most adverse events (AEs) being of mild 
or moderate severity. Thus, glycopyrronium/formoterol pMDI formulated using 
co-suspension delivery technology is a useful new addition that extends 
treatment options for patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-019-01186-x
PMID: 31468315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Rev Med Liege. 2019 Jan;74(1):54-60.

[IMPACT study in COPD].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Corhay JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Pneumologie CHU Sart Tilman, Liège, Belgique.

The role of the anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator triple therapy, including a 
long acting ß2-agonist (LABA), a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and an 
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), in the prevention of the exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is still not clearly established, and 
requires comparison with dual therapy (LABA-CSI or LABA-LAMA). IMPACT is a phase 
3, double-blind randomized study comparing the tritherapy (LABA-LAMA-ICS) in a 
single inhaler (vilanterol 25 ?g/umeclidinium 62.5 ?g/fluticasone furoate 100 
?g) with the LABA-ICS association (vilanterol 25 ?g-fluticasone furoate 100 ?g) 
and the combination LABA-LAMA (vilanterol 25 ?g/umeclidinium 62.5 ?g) on the 
reduction of the rate of exacerbation as the primary outcome, but also on the 
pulmonary function, the quality of life, the dyspnea and the mortality.Triple 
therapy by comparison with dual therapy (LABA-ICS or LABA-LAMA) improves 
numerous parameters such as the rate of moderate to severe exacerbations, the 
symptoms, the respiratory function, the quality of life, while being well 
tolerated. Finally, the IMPACT study gives an "evidence base" for the GOLD 
guidelines proposing triple therapy in symptomatic COPD patients presenting 
exacerbations despite dual therapy.

Publisher: La place de la trithérapie bronchodilatatrice et anti-inflammatoire, 
comprenant un bêta-2 mimétique à longue durée d’action (LABA), un 
anticholinergique à longue durée d’action (LAMA) et un corticostéroïde inhalé 
(CSI), dans la prévention des exacerbations de la bronchopneumopathie chronique 
obstructive (BPCO) n’est pas encore clairement établie, et nécessite une 
comparaison avec les associations de LABA-CSI ou les combinaisons LABA-LAMA. 
IMPACT est une étude randomisée en double aveugle de phase 3 comparant la 
trithérapie (LABA-LAMA-CSI) en un seul inhalateur (vilantérol 25 ?g/ 
uméclidinium 62,5 ?g/fluticasone furoate 100 ?g) avec une association LABA-CSI 
(vilantérol 25 ?g-fluticasone furoate 100 ?g) et une combinaison LABA-LAMA 
(vilantérol 25 ?g/uméclidinium 62,5 ?g) sur la réduction du taux d’exacerbations 
comme critère de jugement primaire, mais aussi sur la fonction respiratoire, la 
qualité de vie, la dyspnée et la mortalité. La trithérapie entraîne une 
diminution significative du taux d’exacerbations modérées ou sévères, améliore 
la dyspnée, la fonction respiratoire et la qualité de vie par rapport à 
l’association fluticasone-vilantérol et la bithérapie bronchodilatatrice 
uméclidinium-vilantérol chez des patients BPCO symptomatiques et présentant des 
exacerbations, tout en étant bien tolérée. Finalement, l’étude IMPACT apporte 
une évidence clinique aux directives du GOLD proposant la trithérapie chez des 
patients BPCO symptomatiques présentant toujours des exacerbations malgré une 
bithérapie.

PMID: 30680975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Tuberk Toraks. 2016 Jun;64(2):112-8. doi: 10.5578/tt.10778.

Compare the efficacy and safety of long acting beta agonists and a combination 
of inhaled steroids and long-acting beta-2 agonist in moderate chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

[Article in English]

Saraç P(1), Sayıner A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, 
Turkey. ptaskiranlar@hotmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: The treatment of COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) aims 
to improve the patients's well-being and to reduce mortality, morbidity and the 
development of exacerbations. This study was thus designed to compare the 
efficacy and tolerability of salmeterol/fluticasone combination with tiotropium 
in patients with moderate COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was an open, prospective, randomized trial in COPD 
patients whose FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 second) levels were between 
80% and 50% predicted. A total of 44 patients who met the inclusion and exlusion 
criteria and who gave written informed consent were included in the study. At 
the end of the two week wash-out period, the patients were randomized to receive 
either salmeterol 50 µg/fluticasone 500 µg combination as dry powder inhaler 
twice daily (SF Group) or tiotropium dry powder inhaler 18 µg once daily (T 
Group) for one year. These were equally distributed in the two groups (22 
patients in each study group). At follow-up, the patients were required to come 
to the outpatient clinic at the third, sixth, ninth and twelfth months.
RESULT: There were no statistically significant difference between the two 
groups with regards to demographic features and baseline measurements. There 
were 1.2 ± 1.7 exacerbations in SF Group and 2.1 ± 2.2 exacerbations in T Group 
(p= 0.070). The time to the first exacerbation was 4.2 ± 4.0 and 4.2 ± 3.3 
months, respectively (p= 0.697). The number of severe exacerbations that 
resulted in admission to the emergency department or hospital was 0.6 ± 1.0 and 
1.1 ± 1.4, respectively (p= 0.245). Significant improvements were observed in 
CAT (CPOD Assessment Test) scores in both groups during the treatment period (p< 
0.0001); but there was no difference between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has shown that in patients with moderate COPD, treatment 
with combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-2 agonist provides similar 
improvements in pulmonary function tests, patient-reported outcomes and exercise 
capacity as compared a long acting beta agonistss.

DOI: 10.5578/tt.10778
PMID: 27481077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Tuberk Toraks. 2015 Jun;63(2):111-31.

[Acute exacerbation in COPD and asthma].

[Article in Turkish]

Yıldırım N(1), Demir T, Gemicioğlu B, Kıyan E, Oğuzülgen K, Polatlı M, Saryal S, 
Sayıner A, Yorgancıoğlu A, Bavbek S, Çelik GE, Günen H, Mungan D, Şen E, Türktaş 
H, Yıldız F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Faculty of Cerrahpasa Medicine, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Turkey. nurhayatyil@hotmail.com.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma are airway diseases with 
acute exacerbations. Natural course of both disease are affected by 
exacerbations. COPD exacerbations may be caused by infections and other causes; 
indoor and outdoor pollution, cardiovascular diseases, asthma-COPD overlap 
syndrome, COPD- obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, pulmonary embolism, 
gastro-oesophageal reflux, anxiety-depression, pulmonary hypertension. Exposure 
to triggering factors, viral infections, treatment insufficiency may cause 
asthma exacerbations. Smoking cessations, prevention of infections, long-acting 
anticholinergics, long-acting 2 agonists, inhaled corticosteroids, 
phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors, mucolytics, prophilactic antibiotics can be 
effective on the prevention of COPD exacerbations. Asthma exacerbations may be 
decreased by the avoidance of allergens, viral infections, occupational 
exposures, airpollution, treatment of comorbid diseases. Effective treatment of 
asthma is required to prevent asthma exacerbations. Inhaled steroids and 
combined treatments are the most effective preventive therapy for exacerbations. 
Patient education and cooperation is an element of the preventive measures for 
asthma attacks. Compliance to therapy, inhalation techniques, written asthma 
plans are required. The essential of COPD and asthma exacerbation treatment is 
bronchodilator therapy. Steroids are also implemented to the therapy, targeting 
the inflammation. Specific treatments of the cause (infection, airpollution, 
pulmonary embolism etc.) should be administered.

PMID: 26167969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Apr 4;13:1089-1104. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S160577. eCollection 2018.

Practical considerations when prescribing a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
for patients with COPD.

D'Urzo AD(1), Kardos P(2), Wiseman R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Group Practice and Centre for Allergy, Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Red 
Cross Maingau Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Suncoast Medical Centre, Coolum Beach, QLD, Australia.

COPD is characterized by persistent airflow limitation, progressive 
breathlessness, cough, and sputum production. long acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMAs) are one of the recommended first-choice therapeutic options for patients 
with COPD, and several new agents have been developed in recent years. A 
literature search identified 14 published randomized, placebo-controlled studies 
of the efficacy and safety of LAMAs in patients with COPD, with improvements 
seen in lung function, exacerbations, breathlessness, and health status. A 
greater weight of evidence currently exists for glycopyrronium (GLY) and 
tiotropium than for umeclidinium and aclidinium, especially in terms of 
exacerbation reductions. To date, there have been few head-to-head clinical 
studies of the different LAMAs. Available data indicate that GLY and aclidinium 
have similar efficacy to tiotropium in terms of improving lung function, 
dyspnea, exacerbations, and health status. Overall, evidence demonstrates that 
currently available LAMAs provide effective and generally well-tolerated therapy 
for patients with COPD. Delivery devices for the different LAMAs vary, which may 
affect individual patient's adherence to and preference for treatment. Subtle 
differences between individual therapeutic options may be important to 
individual patients and the final treatment choice should involve physician's 
and patient's experiences and preferences.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S160577
PMCID: PMC5894726
PMID: 29670345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure ADD’U has received research, 
consulting, and lecturing fees from Almirall, Altana, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Inglelheim (Canada) Ltd, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Canada, KOS 
Pharmaceuticals, Methapharma, Novartis Canada/USA, ONO Pharma, Pfizer Canada, 
Schering Plough, Sepracor, and SkyePharma. PK has received personal fees and 
travel grants from Novartis, AstraZeneca, Bionorica, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini, Mundipharma, Novartis, and Takeda. RW has 
received consulting honoraria and travel grants from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Australia, and Novartis. The authors report 
no other conflicts of interest in this work.


69. COPD. 2017 Apr;14(2):200-209. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1257598. Epub 2017 Jan 
19.

Disease Burden of Patients with Asthma/COPD Overlap in a US Claims Database: 
Impact of ICD-9 Coding-based Definitions.

Wurst KE(1), St Laurent S(1), Hinds D(1), Davis KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)a Worldwide Epidemiology, GlaxoSmithKline , Collegeville , PA , USA.

The inclusion of an asthma/chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap 
syndrome (ACOS) population in the 2015 Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease strategic documents has raised questions about the profile of these 
patients in clinical practice, as they are mostly excluded from asthma and COPD 
clinical trials. We estimated the disease burden, co-morbidities, and 
respiratory treatments of patients with asthma/COPD overlap, utilizing the 
Truven MarketScan commercial and Medicare databases. Patients with ≥1 COPD or 
chronic obstructive asthma diagnostic code were identified between January 1, 
2008, and December 31, 2011. The asthma/COPD overlap group was defined and 
stratified based upon type and frequency of asthma diagnostic code (chronic 
obstructive asthma only, COPD and chronic obstructive asthma, and COPD and ≥1 
asthma code). 1,488,613 patients were identified; of these, 1,171,626 were 
diagnosed with COPD alone and 316,987 with asthma/COPD overlap. Patients with 
asthma and COPD had higher disease burden indicators and inhaled 
corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist use compared with COPD alone. This trend 
was consistent for all definitions of asthma/COPD overlap. Patients with 
obstructive asthma and COPD tended to be older, with greater disease burden 
compared with other definitions; this population may represent a more severe 
form of asthma/COPD overlap. Disease burden and treatment also varied based on 
the codes defining asthma/COPD overlap, indicating possible phenotypic 
differences. More clinical insight and detailed phenotyping is needed to 
determine the reasons for coding variation in asthma/COPD overlap, with 
implications for further research to address unmet needs.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1257598
PMID: 28103123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 6;14:2835-2848. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S217710. eCollection 2019.

An Evaluation Of Single And Dual Long-Acting Bronchodilator Therapy As Effective 
Interventions In Maintenance Therapy-Naïve Patients With COPD.

Singh D(1), D'Urzo AD(2), Donohue JF(3), Kerwin EM(4), Molins E(5), Chuecos 
F(5), Ribera A(5), Jarreta D(5).

Author information:
(1)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester University 
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(2)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
North Carolina Pulmonary Critical Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Clinical Research Institute, Medford, OR, USA.
(5)BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Ideally, treatment recommendations for maintenance therapy-naïve 
patients with COPD should be based on studies conducted specifically in this 
population. We have reviewed evidence from previous studies of pharmacological 
treatments in maintenance therapy-naïve patients with COPD and performed a new 
post-hoc analysis of dual bronchodilator treatment in this population, aiming to 
assess the effectiveness of these interventions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature review identified clinical trials that 
included analyses of patients with COPD who were maintenance therapy-naïve with 
long-acting beta-agonists (LABA) or long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA). 
Additionally, a post-hoc subgroup analysis was conducted for maintenance 
therapy-naïve patients with COPD in two large phase III, randomized, 
double-blind, 24-week trials investigating the efficacy of aclidinium 
bromide/formoterol fumarate (AB/FF) fixed-dose combination versus monotherapy or 
placebo (ACLIFORM [NCT01462942] and AUGMENT [NCT01437397]).
RESULTS: Treatment-naïve patients with COPD often represent a population of 
patients at the earliest stage at which most patients seek treatment. Of nine 
relevant studies identified, all reported positive findings for efficacy of 
LABA, LAMA, or LABA/LAMA treatment in maintenance therapy-naïve populations. 
Improvements were observed in lung function, symptoms, and health status versus 
monotherapy or placebo. Post-hoc analysis of ACLIFORM and AUGMENT demonstrated 
that AB/FF was effective in improving lung function in patients who had received 
no prior maintenance therapy. AB/FF showed improvements in 1 hr post-dose FEV1, 
trough FEV1, and patient-reported outcomes versus placebo and monotherapies. 
Combined with reviews of previous studies in maintenance therapy-naïve patients, 
these findings suggest that earlier intervention with a dual bronchodilator 
maintenance therapy, such as AB/FF, may provide significantly greater benefits 
than LAMA or LABA mono-bronchodilator therapy as a first maintenance treatment 
for COPD.
CONCLUSION: These data show that therapeutic intervention is effective in 
treatment-naïve patients. Intervention with dual bronchodilator therapy as a 
first maintenance treatment for COPD may provide greater benefits than LAMA or 
LABA monotherapy.

© 2019 Singh et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S217710
PMCID: PMC6902852
PMID: 31827323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DS is supported by the NIHR Manchester 
Biomedical Research Centre; and has received sponsorship to attend international 
meetings, honoraria for lecturing or attending advisory boards and research 
grants from various pharmaceutical companies including Apellis, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A, Cipla, Genentech, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, Johnson & Johnson, Mundipharma, Novartis, 
Peptinnovate Ltd., Pfizer Inc, Pulmatrix, Skyepharma, Teva, Theravance 
Biopharma, Menarini, and Verona Pharma. ADD has received research, consulting, 
and lecturing fees from Almirall, Altana, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim 
(Canada) Ltd, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, KOS Pharmaceuticals, Merck 
Canada, Methapharm, Novartis Canada/USA, ONO Pharmaceutical Co., Pfizer Canada, 
Schering-Plough, Sepracor, and SkyePharma. JFD has received consulting fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Circassia, GSK, Mylan, Theravance, 
and Sunovion. He is a member of the Data Monitoring Committee for AstraZeneca. 
EMK has participated in consulting, advisory boards, speaker panels, or received 
travel reimbursement from Amphastar Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Cipla, Chesi, Forest Laboratories LLC, GSK, Mylan, Novartis, Oriel, 
Pearl, Sunovion, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., and Theravance Biopharma. 
He has conducted multicenter clinical research trials for ~40 pharmaceutical 
companies. EM, FC, and DJ are employees of AstraZeneca and former employees of 
Almirall S.A., Barcelona, Spain. AR is a former employee of Almirall S.A., 
Barcelona, Spain and was an employee of AstraZeneca at the time the study was 
conducted. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


71. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2017 Feb;26(2):161-174. doi: 
10.1080/13543784.2017.1276167. Epub 2017 Jan 9.

Long acting muscarinic antagonists for the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: a review of current and developing drugs.

Mastrodicasa MA(1)(2), Droege CA(3), Mulhall AM(1)(2), Ernst NE(3), Panos 
RJ(1)(2), Zafar MA(1).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine , University of Cincinnati 
Medical Center , Cincinnati , OH , USA.
(2)c Department of Medicine , Cincinnati Veterans Affairs Medical Center , 
Cincinnati , OH , USA.
(3)b Department of Pharmacy Services , University of Cincinnati Medical Center , 
Cincinnati , OH , USA.

Long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMA) reverse airflow obstruction 
by antagonizing para-sympathetic bronchoconstricting effects within the airways. 
For years, tiotropium, has been the cornerstone LAMA for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) management. Recently, new agents, aclidinium bromide, 
glycopyrronium bromide, and umeclidinium bromide, have been developed and 
introduced into clinical practice. Areas covered: This article reviews the 
clinical efficacy and adverse effects of currently available LAMAs in COPD 
treatment as well as developing LAMAs in early clinical trials and preclinical 
studies (V0162, TD-4208, CHF 5407, AZD9164, AZD8683, bencycloquidium). In 
addition, a new class of molecule that combines muscarinic antagonist and 
beta-adrenergic properties (MABA) is described and current developmental progress 
discussed (GSK-961081, THRX-200495). Expert opinion: Future key areas for 
developing drugs for the management of COPD include prolonged duration of 
action, optimal delivery systems, synergistic combinations with other drugs, 
maximization of benefits and minimization of adverse effects. The development of 
new LAMA and MABA molecules provides exciting progress towards simpler and more 
effective COPD management.

DOI: 10.1080/13543784.2017.1276167
PMID: 28004591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Cardiol. 2017 Aug;70(2):128-134. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2017.03.001. Epub 2017 
Mar 18.

Total management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) as an 
independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease.

Onishi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Onishi Heart Clinic, Mie, Japan. Electronic address: 
katsu@clin.medic.mie-u.ac.jp.

Patients with cardiovascular disease (CVD) often have multiple comorbid 
conditions that may interact with each other, confound the choice of treatments, 
and reduce mortality. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the 
most important comorbidities of CVD, which causes serious consequences in 
patients with ischemic heart disease, stroke, arrhythmia, and heart failure. 
COPD shares common risk factors such as tobacco smoking and aging with CVD, is 
associated with less physical activity, and produces systemic inflammation and 
oxidative stress. Overall, patients with COPD have a 2-3-fold increased risk of 
CVD as compared to age-matched controls when adjusted for tobacco smoking. 
Chronic heart failure (HF) is a frequent and important comorbidity which has a 
significant impact on prognosis in COPD, and vice versa. HF overlaps in symptoms 
and signs and has a common comorbidity with COPD, so that diagnosis of COPD is 
difficult in patients with HF. The combination of HF and COPD presents many 
therapeutic challenges including beta-blockers (BBs) and beta-agonists. Inhaled 
long-acting bronchodilators including beta2-agonists and anticholinergics for 
COPD would not worsen HF. Diuretics are relatively safe, and 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are preferred to treat HF accompanied 
with COPD. BBs are only relatively contraindicated in asthma, but not in COPD. 
Low doses of cardioselective BBs should be aggressively initiated in clinically 
stable patients with HF accompanied with COPD combined with close monitoring for 
signs of airway obstruction and gradually up-titrated to the maximum tolerated 
dose. Encouraging appropriate and aggressive treatment for both HF and COPD 
should be recommended to improve quality of life and mortality in HF patients 
with COPD.

Copyright © 2017 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2017.03.001
PMID: 28325523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Eur Respir J. 2016 Aug;48(2):320-30. doi: 10.1183/13993003.02165-2015. Epub 2016 
Jul 13.

A phase III randomised controlled trial of single-dose triple therapy in COPD: 
the IMPACT protocol.

Pascoe SJ(1), Lipson DA(2), Locantore N(3), Barnacle H(4), Brealey N(4), 
Mohindra R(4), Dransfield MT(5), Pavord I(6), Barnes N(7).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, King of Prussia, PA, USA 
steven.j.pascoe@gsk.com.
(2)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, King of Prussia, PA, USA Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, King of Prussia, PA, USA.
(4)Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, GSK, Brentford, UK.
(5)UAB Lung Health Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
USA.
(6)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Old Road Campus, Oxford, UK.
(7)Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, GSK, Brentford, UK William Harvey 
Institute, Barts & The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

Patients with symptomatic advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
who experience recurrent exacerbations are particularly at risk of poor outcomes 
and present a significant burden on healthcare systems. The relative merits of 
treating with different inhaled combination therapies e.g. inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS)/long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), LABA/long acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMA), ICS/LABA/LAMA, in this patient group are poorly understood, 
as is reflected in current guidelines. The InforMing the PAthway of COPD 
Treatment (IMPACT) study will evaluate the efficacy and safety of fluticasone 
furoate (FF)/umeclidinium (UMEC)/vilanterol (VI) versus FF/VI or UMEC/VI over a 
52-week treatment period. The study has been designed with a focus on 
understanding the comparative merits of each treatment modality in different 
phenotypes/endotypes.This is a phase III, randomised, double-blind, three-arm, 
parallel-group, global multicentre study comparing the rate of moderate and 
severe exacerbations between FF/UMEC/VI and FF/VI or UMEC/VI over a 52-week 
treatment period. The study aims to recruit 10 000 patients from approximately 
1070 centres. Eligible patients are aged ≥40 years, with symptomatic advanced 
COPD (Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) group D) and 
an exacerbation in the previous 12 months.The first patients were recruited to 
the IMPACT study (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02164513) in June 2014 and the 
anticipated completion date is July 2017.

Copyright ©ERS 2016.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.02165-2015
PMID: 27418551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Pharmacotherapy. 2016 Jan;36(1):26-37. doi: 10.1002/phar.1684.

Comparative Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Safety of Inhaled Long-Acting 
Bronchodilators in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A 
Population-Based Cohort Study.

Dong YH(1)(2), Chang CH(3)(4), Gagne JJ(1), Hsu CL(5)(6), Lai MS(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Department of 
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(2)Center of Comparative Effectiveness Research, National Center of Excellence 
for Clinical Trial and Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public 
Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, National 
Taiwan University Hospital and College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: Inhaled long-acting bronchodilators are commonly used as 
maintenance therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We compared 
the risk of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events among patients with COPD 
treated with inhaled long-acting bronchodilator monotherapy and combination 
therapy.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTINGS: A population-based health care database from Taiwan.
PATIENTS: Individuals with COPD who initiated long acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMAs) alone, long-acting β-2 agonists (LABA) alone, and LABA and LAMA in 
combination between 2001 and 2010.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: We used Cox regression models to compare a 
composite cardiovascular outcome, defined as hospitalization for acute 
myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, and cerebrovascular diseases 
among the three treatment groups, adjusting for potential confounders. Among a 
cohort of 3458 study-eligible patients, we identified 505 composite 
cardiovascular events during 10,590 patient-years of follow-up. In the primary 
analysis which considered first exposure carried forward, LABA alone and LAMA 
alone were associated with similar risks of the composite outcome (hazard ratio 
[HR] 1.09; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.87-1.37). The HR comparing LABA and 
LAMA in combination with LAMA alone was 1.13 (95% CI 0.60-2.13) and to LABA 
alone was 1.03 (95% CI 0.55-1.92). The secondary analysis in which we allowed 
patients to reenter the cohort upon treatment change yielded similar results, 
but with slightly higher HRs comparing LABA and LAMA in combination with LAMA 
alone (HR 1.26, 95% CI 0.74-2.15) and to LABA alone (HR 1.31, 95% CI 0.80-2.13).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest similar cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 
safety of LABA and LAMA when agents are used alone. Additional studies are 
needed to rule out potential risk associated with inhaled long-acting 
bronchodilator combination therapy.

© 2016 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/phar.1684
PMID: 26799347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Sep 19;13:2917-2929. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S172408. eCollection 2018.

Effect of background long-acting beta(2)-agonist therapy on the efficacy and 
safety of a novel, nebulized glycopyrrolate in subjects with 
moderate-to-very-severe COPD.

Kerwin EM(1), Tosiello R(2), Price B(2), Sanjar S(2), Goodin T(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Inc., Medford, OR, USA, 
ekerwin@criresearch.com.
(2)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., Marlborough, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Phase III studies demonstrated efficacy and safety of nebulized 
glycopyrrolate inhalation solution (GLY) in subjects with COPD. Secondary 
analyses were performed to examine the effect of background long-acting 
beta2-agonist (LABA) use on the efficacy and safety of nebulized GLY.
METHODS: In two 12-week placebo-controlled studies (GOLDEN 3 and GOLDEN 4) and 
one 48-week, open-label active-controlled study (GOLDEN 5), a total of 2,379 
subjects were stratified by background LABA use (LABA-yes: n=861; LABA-no: 
n=1,518) and randomized to placebo vs GLY 25 or 50 µg twice daily, or GLY 50 µg 
twice daily vs tiotropium (TIO) 18 µg once daily. Lung function, 
patient-reported outcomes, exacerbations, and safety were assessed.
RESULTS: Compared with placebo, pooled data from the 12-week studies showed 
significant improvements from baseline with GLY 25 and 50 µg across LABA 
subgroups in trough FEV1 (LABA-yes: 0.101 and 0.110 L; LABA-no: 0.092 and 0.101 
L, respectively; P<0.001) and St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score 
(SGRQ; LABA-yes: -2.957 and -3.888; LABA-no: -3.301 and -2.073, respectively; 
P<0.05). Incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) was similar in 
LABA subgroups, and lower in GLY 25 µg vs placebo. In the 48-week 
active-controlled study, GLY and TIO both showed improvement from baseline 
across LABA subgroups in FEV1 (LABA-yes: 0.106 and 0.092 L; LABA-no: 0.096 and 
0.096 L, respectively) and in SGRQ total score (LABA-yes: -5.190 and -3.094; 
LABA-no: -4.368 and -4.821, respectively). Incidence of TEAEs was similar 
between GLY and TIO, and across LABA subgroups. Exacerbation rates were similar 
across treatments and LABA subgroups, and cardiovascular events of special 
interest were more frequent in the LABA-no subgroup. Nebulized GLY, combined 
with LABA, did not generate any additional safety signals.
CONCLUSION: Nebulized GLY demonstrated efficacy and was well tolerated up to 48 
weeks in subjects with COPD with/without background LABA.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S172408
PMCID: PMC6157543
PMID: 30275690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure EMK has participated in consulting, 
advisory boards, speaker panels, or received travel reimbursement for Amphastar, 
AstraZeneca, Forest, Mylan, Novartis, Oriel, Pearl, Sunovion, Teva, and 
Theravance. He has conducted multicenter clinical research trials for ~40 
pharmaceutical companies. RT, BP, SS, and TG are employees of Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals Inc. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


76. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Mar 5;13:781-792. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S153655. eCollection 2018.

Factors influencing treatment escalation from long acting muscarinic antagonist 
monotherapy to triple therapy in patients with COPD: a retrospective 
THIN-database analysis.

Hurst JR(1), Dilleen M(2), Morris K(3), Hills S(3), Emir B(4), Jones R(5).

Author information:
(1)UCL Respiratory, University College London, London, UK.
(2)Statistics, Global Product Development, Pfizer, Tadworth, UK.
(3)Medical Affairs, Pfizer, Tadworth, UK.
(4)Biostatistics, Global Product Development, Pfizer, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Clinical Trials & Health Research, Institute of Translational and Stratified 
Medicine, Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Plymouth, UK.

PURPOSE: Inappropriate use of an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) for COPD has 
clinical and economic disadvantages. This retrospective analysis of The UK 
Health Improvement Network (THIN) database identified factors influencing 
treatment escalation (step-up) from a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
to triple therapy (LAMA + long-acting β-agonist-ICS). Secondary objectives 
included time to step up from first LAMA prescription, Global Initiative for 
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) grouping (2011/2013, 2017), and Medical 
Research Council (MRC) grade prior to treatment escalation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data were included from 14,866 people ≥35 years old with 
a COPD diagnosis (June 1, 2010-May 10, 2015) and initiated on LAMA monotherapy. 
The most commonly used LAMA at baseline was tiotropium (92%).
RESULTS: Multivariate analysis (10,492 patients) revealed that COPD 
exacerbations, lower forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), "asthma", MRC 
grade, proactive and reactive COPD primary care, elective secondary-care 
contact, cough, and number of short-acting bronchodilator prescriptions were 
positively associated with treatment escalation (P<0.05). Being older, a 
current/ex-smoker, or having increased sputum symptom codes were negatively 
associated with treatment escalation (P<0.05). Median MRC score was 2 at 
baseline and 3 prior to treatment escalation. Using the last MRC reading and 
exacerbation history in the year prior to escalation, GOLD 2017 groupings were A 
27.4%, B 37.3%, C 15.3%, and D 20%. In patients with available FEV1 measures, 
exacerbations, and MRC code (n=1,064), GOLD 2011/2013 groupings were A 20.4%, B 
19.2%, C 24.8%, and D 35.6%.
CONCLUSION: While the presence of COPD exacerbations seems to be the main driver 
for treatment escalation, according to the 2017 GOLD strategy many patients 
appear to be overtreated, as they would not be recommended for treatment 
escalation. Reviewing patients' treatment in the light of the new GOLD strategy 
has the potential to reduce inappropriate use of triple therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S153655
PMCID: PMC5842770
PMID: 29551894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure JRH reports personal fees for 
advisory boards and educational activities and support to attend meetings from 
pharmaceutical companies that make medicines to treat COPD. MD, SH, and BE are 
employees of Pfizer and have company stock/shares. KM was an employee of Pfizer 
at the time of study conduct. RJ reports no conflicts of interest in relation to 
this study, but reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Cipla, GSK, Novartis, and Pfizer. The authors report no other conflicts 
of interest in this work.


77. Respir Res. 2015 Nov 16;16:141. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0295-2.

Characteristics, disease burden and costs of COPD patients in the two years 
following initiation of long-acting bronchodilators in UK primary care.

Punekar YS(1), Landis SH(2), Wurst K(3)(4), Le H(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline Stockley Park, Uxbridge, UB11 
1BT, UK. yogesh.q.punekar@gsk.com.
(2)Worldwide Epidemiology, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Uxbridge, UK. 
Sarah.h.landis@gsk.com.
(3)Former employee of GlaxoSmithKline R&D, RTP, Durham, NC, USA. 
kewurst@gmail.com.
(4)Former employee of Parexel International, RTP, Durham, NC, USA. 
kewurst@gmail.com.
(5)Former employee of GlaxoSmithKline R&D, RTP, Durham, NC, USA. 
Hoa.vanle@gmail.com.
(6)Former employee of Parexel International, RTP, Durham, NC, USA. 
Hoa.vanle@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: To assess the symptomatic and cost burden among patients initiating 
long-acting bronchodilator (LABD) therapy and impact of adherence on healthcare 
resource use and costs.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study identified patients with COPD who were 
newly prescribed a LABD (long acting muscarinic antagonist [LAMA], long-acting 
beta2-agonist [LABA], a combination of LABA+LAMA or combination of LABA with 
inhaled corticosteroid [ICS]/LABA) between January 1, 2009 and November 30, 2013 
from the UK Clinical Practice Research Datalink. Health care resource use, costs 
and symptom burden up to 24 months after treatment initiation were estimated. 
Adherence in the follow-up period was assessed using the medication possession 
ratio (MPR ≥ 80%).
RESULTS: The cohort comprised 8283 LABD initiators (16% LABA, 81% LAMA and 3% 
LABA+LAMA) and 9246 LABA+ICS initiators with generally similar baseline 
characteristics; prior exacerbation rate was higher in the LABA+ICS cohort. Less 
than half the patients (LAMA:42%; LABA:34% and LABA+ICS:34%) were adherent to 
their index medication. Among adherent patients, the total annual per patient 
cost of COPD was £3008 for LAMA initiators, £2783 for LABA initiators and £3376 
for LABA+ICS initiators; primarily due to general practitioner interactions. 
Among patients with a Medical Research Council dyspnea score recorded during 24 
months follow-up, a substantial proportion of adherent patients (LAMA: 41%; 
LABA: 45%; LABA+ICS 44%) had clinically significant dyspnoea (MRC ≥ 3).
CONCLUSION: Cost and symptomatic burden of COPD was high among patients 
initiating maintenance treatment, including patients adherent with their initial 
treatment. General practitioner interactions were the primary driver of costs. 
Further, real world studies are required to address unmet needs and optimize 
treatment pathways to improve COPD symptom burden and outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0295-2
PMCID: PMC4647637
PMID: 26572740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Curr Med Res Opin. 2016 May;32(5):975-7. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2016.1145108. 
Epub 2016 Mar 4.

Safety of long acting muscarinic antagonists: are all these drugs always and 
equally safe?

Melani AS(1), Sestini P(2).

Author information:
(1)a Respiratory Rehabilitation and Pathophysiology Unit, Cardiovascular and 
Lung Department , Policlinico le Scotte, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria 
Senese , Siena , Italy ;
(2)b Respiratory Disease Clinics, Siena University, Policlinico le Scotte, 
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese , Siena , Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators - such as long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists 
(LAMAs) - are central to the pharmacological management of symptomatic chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. LAMAs are considered to be safe drugs at 
recommended dosages. In the present issue of the Journal safety of umeclidinium, 
a recently marketed LAMA, at twice the recommended dosage, has been evaluated 
with good results in a Japanese, COPD population. However, because muscarinic 
receptors are expressed not only in the lungs but also at the level of heart, 
digestive and urinary apparatus, the potential exists for LAMAs to cause adverse 
events related to stimulation of receptors in these organs. Head-to-head and 
post-marketing vigilance studies are required to determine the profile risk of 
these drugs, ultimately, and whether differences exist between currently 
available LAMAs.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2016.1145108
PMID: 26789695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2018 Jul;123(1):58-64. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.12978. 
Epub 2018 Mar 25.

Seventeen-Year Nationwide Trends in Use of Long-acting Bronchodilators and 
Inhaled Corticosteroids among Adults - A Danish Drug Utilization Study.

Reilev M(1)(2), Pottegård A(1), Davidsen JR(3), Rasmussen L(1), Søndergaard 
J(2), Laursen CB(3), Henriksen DP(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Department of Public Health, University 
of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(2)Research Unit of General Practice, Department of Public Health, University of 
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Odense University Hospital, Odense, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Biochemistry & Pharmacology, Odense University 
Hospital, Odense, Denmark.

Long-acting bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are the 
cornerstones in treatment of chronic obstructive and inflammatory pulmonary 
diseases. However, non-adherence to guidelines is widespread. Detailed 
information on real-life treatment patterns is needed to promote rational use. 
We aimed to investigate nationwide time trends in individual-level treatment 
patterns of long-acting bronchodilators and ICS. Using nationwide Danish health 
registries, we identified all Danish adults with a prescription for long-acting 
bronchodilators and/or ICS from 2000 to 2016. We investigated the total use of 
long-acting bronchodilators and ICS, the proportion of current users and the 
rate of new users over time. Finally, we assessed treatment persistence. We 
included 23,061,681 prescriptions for long-acting bronchodilators and ICS issued 
to 805,860 individuals from 2000 to 2016. Over this period, the total annual 
amount of prescribed long-acting bronchodilators and ICS increased by 39%. 
Similarly, the proportion of adult users increased from 2.6% to 4.5%, mainly 
driven by the introduction of combination therapy and long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA). Although the rate of new users of fixed-dose combination 
drugs increased substantially over time, the overall rate of new users was 
stable. In general, the proportion of patients on therapy after 1 year was low 
(25-53%), especially among young individuals and users of ICS. We document a 
pronounced increase in the total use of long-acting bronchodilators and ICS over 
time, mainly driven by the introduction of combination drugs and LAMA. Special 
attention should be paid to the low level of persistence, especially among young 
individuals and users of ICS.

© 2018 Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT (former Nordic 
Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.12978
PMID: 29417739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Oct 15;10:2207-17. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S91694. eCollection 2015.

The inevitable drift to triple therapy in COPD: an analysis of prescribing 
pathways in the UK.

Brusselle G(1), Price D(2), Gruffydd-Jones K(3), Miravitlles M(4), Keininger 
DL(5), Stewart R(6), Baldwin M(7), Jones RC(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium 
; Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands ; 
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.
(2)Centre of Academic Primary Care, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK ; 
Research in Real Life (RiRL), Singapore.
(3)Box Surgery, Wiltshire, UK.
(4)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Research in Real Life (RiRL), Singapore.
(7)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Limited, Horsham, UK.
(8)Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth, 
UK.

BACKGROUND: Real-world prescription pathways leading to triple therapy (TT) 
(inhaled corticosteroid [ICS] plus long-acting beta-agonist bronchodilator [LABA] 
plus long acting muscarinic antagonist) differ from Global initiative for 
chronic Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD] and National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence treatment recommendations. This study sets out to identify COPD 
patients without asthma receiving TT, and determine the pathways taken from 
diagnosis to the first prescription of TT.
METHODS: This was a historical analysis of COPD patients without asthma from the 
Optimum Patient Care Research Database (387 primary-care practices across the 
UK) from 2002 to 2010. Patient disease severity was classified using GOLD 2013 
criteria. Data were analyzed to determine prescribing of TT before, at, and 
after COPD diagnosis; the average time taken to receive TT; and the impact of 
lung function grade, modified Medical Research Council dyspnea score, and 
exacerbation history on the pathway to TT.
RESULTS: During the study period, 32% of patients received TT. Of these, 19%, 
28%, 37%, and 46% of patients classified as GOLD A, B, C, and D, respectively, 
progressed to TT after diagnosis (P<0.001). Of all patients prescribed TT, 25% 
were prescribed TT within 1 year of diagnosis, irrespective of GOLD 
classification (P=0.065). The most common prescription pathway to TT was LABA 
plus ICS. It was observed that exacerbation history did influence the pathway of 
LABA plus ICS to TT.
CONCLUSION: Real life UK prescription data demonstrates the inappropriate 
prescribing of TT and confirms that starting patients on ICS plus LABA results 
in the inevitable drift to overuse of TT. This study highlights the need for 
dissemination and implementation of COPD guidelines to physicians, ensuring that 
patients receive the recommended therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S91694
PMCID: PMC4621207
PMID: 26527869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2015;8(4):479-501. doi: 
10.1586/17512433.2015.1058154.

long acting muscarinic antagonists.

Melani AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento Vasi, Cuore e Torace, Fisiopatologia e Riabilitazione 
Respiratoria, Policlinico Le Scotte, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, 
Viale Bracci Siena, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of death and 
disability worldwide. Inhaled bronchodilators are the mainstay of COPD 
pharmacological treatment. long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) are a 
major class of inhaled bronchodilators. Some LAMA/device systems with different 
characteristics and dosing schedules are currently approved for maintenance 
therapy of COPD and a range of other products are being developed. They improve 
lung function and patient-reported outcomes and reduce acute bronchial 
exacerbations with good safety. LAMAs are used either alone or associated with 
long-acting β₂-agonists, eventually in fixed dose combinations. Long-acting 
β₂-agonist/LAMA combinations assure additional benefits over the individual 
components alone. The reader will obtain a view of the safety and efficacy of 
the different LAMA/device systems in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1586/17512433.2015.1058154
PMID: 26109098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Respir Med. 2015 Oct;109(10):1320-5. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.08.001. Epub 2015 
Aug 6.

Physical activity in COPD patients decreases short-acting bronchodilator use and 
the number of exacerbations.

Katajisto M(1), Koskela J(2), Lindqvist A(2), Kilpeläinen M(3), Laitinen T(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Unit of Pulmonary Diseases and Division of Pulmonology HUCH 
Heart and Lung Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, 
Finland. Electronic address: milla.katajisto@fimnet.fi.
(2)Clinical Research Unit of Pulmonary Diseases and Division of Pulmonology HUCH 
Heart and Lung Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, 
Finland.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases and Clinical Allergology, Turku University 
Hospital and University of Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Physically inactive patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) exhibit higher rates of exacerbations and symptoms of dyspnoea 
than active patients. Whether the use of COPD medication explains these 
differences is not known.
AIM: This study evaluated differences in the use of COPD medication and the 
number of exacerbations due to physical activity.
METHODS: A COPD cohort (N = 719) was followed through medical records to 
identify hospital admissions, and exercise activity was evaluated using mailed 
questionnaires. The national drug reimbursement registry identified drug 
purchases for one year.
RESULTS: The use of maintenance therapies, such as long acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMAs), long acting beta agonists (LABAs), inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS), and theophylline, did not differ significantly between physically active 
(N = 346) and inactive (N = 355) COPD patients. The cumulative dose of 
salbutamol (85 vs. 218 mg, adjusted P = 0.01) and oral corticosteroids (OCS) 
(621 vs. 1068 mg, adjusted P = 0.02) were significantly higher in inactive 
patients, regardless of disease severity. LABAs, LAMAs, and ICS were used in 
reduced doses in both patient groups compared to daily defined doses (DDD). 
Physical activity was independently associated with the number of hospital 
admissions and the use of OCS and short-acting bronchodilators.
CONCLUSION: Physical inactivity in COPD was not associated with poorer use of 
maintenance therapies. In contrast, inactivity was independently associated with 
the number of exacerbations measured by hospital admissions and the use of OCS 
and short-acting symptom-relieving medications.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.08.001
PMID: 26298024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Dec 5;12:3469-3485. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S146338. eCollection 2017.

The impact of dual bronchodilation on cardiovascular serious adverse events and 
mortality in COPD: a quantitative synthesis.

Rogliani P(1)(2), Matera MG(3), Ora J(2), Cazzola M(1), Calzetta L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome Tor 
Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Tor Vergata, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, 
Naples, Italy.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Oct 31;13:3597.

OBJECTIVE: Long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) and long acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMAs) are burdened by the potential risk of inducing 
cardiovascular serious adverse events (SAEs) in COPD patients. Since the risk of 
combining a LABA with a LAMA could be greater, we have carried out a 
quantitative synthesis to investigate the cardiovascular safety profile of 
LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations (FDCs).
METHODS: A pair-wise and network meta-analysis was performed by using the data 
of the repository database ClinicalTrials.gov concerning the impact of approved 
LABA/LAMA FDCs versus monocomponents and/or placebo on cardiovascular SAEs in 
COPD.
RESULTS: Overall, LABA/LAMA FDCs did not significantly (P>0.05) modulate the 
risk of cardiovascular SAEs versus monocomponents. However, the network 
meta-analysis indicated that aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg and 
tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 µg were the safest FDCs, followed by 
umeclidinium/vilanterol 62.5/25 µg which was as safe as placebo, whereas 
glycopyrronium/formoterol 14.9/9.6, glycopyrronium/indacaterol 15.6/27.5 µg, and 
glycopyrronium/indacaterol 50/110 µg were the least safe FDCs. No impact on 
mortality was detected for each specific FDC.
CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis indicates that LABA/LAMA FDC therapy is 
characterized by an excellent cardiovascular safety profile in COPD patients. 
However, the findings of this quantitative synthesis have been obtained from 
populations that participated in randomized clinical trials, and were devoid of 
major cardiovascular diseases. Thus, post-marketing surveillance and 
observational studies may help to better define the real impact of specific FDCs 
with regard to the cardiovascular risk.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S146338
PMCID: PMC5723113
PMID: 29255354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure PR participated as a lecturer, 
speaker, and advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship of 
Almirall, AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Group, Mundipharma, and Novartis; her department was 
funded by Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Zambon. MGM has 
participated as a lecturer, speaker, and advisor in scientific meetings and 
courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline and Novartis, and has been a consultant to 
Chiesi Farmaceutici. JO has no conflicts of interest in this work. MC has 
participated as a lecturer, speaker, and advisor in scientific meetings and 
courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Group, Lallemand, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Verona Pharma, and Zambon, and is or has been a 
consultant to Chiesi Farmaceutici, Edmond Pharma Lallemand, Novartis, Verona 
Pharma, and Zambon; his department was funded by Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Novartis, and Zambon. LC has participated as advisor in scientific meetings 
under the sponsorship of Boehringer Ingelheim and Novartis, received 
non-financial support by AstraZeneca, received a research grant partially funded 
by Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and Almirall, and is or has been a consultant 
to Edmond Pharma, Zambon and Verona Pharma; his departmentwas funded by 
Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Zambon.


84. Lung. 2017 Dec;195(6):739-747. doi: 10.1007/s00408-017-0055-9. Epub 2017 Oct 9.

Dual Bronchodilation with Indacaterol Maleate/Glycopyrronium Bromide Compared 
with Umeclidinium Bromide/Vilanterol in Patients with Moderate-to-Severe COPD: 
Results from Two Randomized, Controlled, Cross-over Studies.

Kerwin E(1), Ferguson GT(2), Sanjar S(3), Goodin T(3), Yadao A(4), Fogel R(4), 
Maitra S(5), Sen B(5), Ayers T(4), Banerji D(6).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Institute, Medford, OR, USA.
(2)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(3)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., 84 Waterford Drive, Marlborough, MA, USA.
(4)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(5)Novartis Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad, India.
(6)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. 
donald.banerji@novartis.com.

PURPOSE: To compare the efficacy and safety of two long-acting dual 
bronchodilator combinations: indacaterol/glycopyrrolate (IND/GLY) versus 
umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI).
METHODS: Studies A2349 and A2350 were replicate, randomized, double-blind, 
double-dummy, active-controlled, cross-over studies in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD. Patients were randomized to sequential 12-week 
treatments of twice-daily IND/GLY 27.5/15.6 μg and once-daily UMEC/VI 
62.5/25 μg, each separated by a 3-week washout. The primary objective was to 
demonstrate non-inferiority of IND/GLY compared with UMEC/VI in terms of the 
24-h forced expiratory volume in 1 s profile at week 12 (FEV1 AUC0-24). Rescue 
medication use, symptom control, and safety were assessed throughout.
RESULTS: Both treatments delivered substantial bronchodilation over 12 weeks, 
with improvements in FEV1 AUC0-24h at week 12 of 232 and 185 mL for IND/GLY, and 
244 and 203 mL with UMEC/VI in Studies A2349 and A2350, respectively. The 
primary efficacy objective of non-inferiority of IND/GLY relative to UMEC/VI was 
not met as the lower bound of the confidence interval for the LS treatment 
comparison was below the pre-specified non-inferiority margin of -20 mL in both 
studies: -26.9 and -34.2 mL, respectively (LS mean between-treatment 
differences: -11.5 and -18.2 mL). Both drugs were well tolerated, with AE 
profiles consistent with their respective prescribing information.
CONCLUSIONS: IND/GLY and UMEC/VI provided clinically meaningful and comparable 
bronchodilation. Non-inferiority of IND/GLY to UMEC/VI could not be declared 
although between-treatment differences were not clinically relevant. The data 
support the use of IND/GLY as an efficacious and well tolerated treatment option 
in patients with COPD. (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02487446 and NCT02487498).

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-017-0055-9
PMID: 28993871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Adv Ther. 2019 Mar;36(3):495-519. doi: 10.1007/s12325-019-0893-3. Epub 2019 Feb 
11.

Fixed-Dose Combinations of Long-Acting Bronchodilators for the Management of 
COPD: Global and Asian Perspectives.

Rhee CK(1), Yoshisue H(2), Lad R(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Seoul St Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Novartis Pharma K.K., Tokyo, Japan. hajime.yoshisue@novartis.com.
(3)Novartis Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad, India.

Maintenance bronchodilator therapy with long-acting β-agonists (LABAs) and 
long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) is the cornerstone treatment for 
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Fixed-dose 
combinations (FDCs) of LABA/LAMA are recommended for the majority of symptomatic 
COPD patients by global guidelines; regional guidelines such as the Japanese and 
Korean guidelines also provide similar recommendations for the use of LABA/LAMA 
FDCs. This review comprehensively describes the latest clinical evidence from 
key studies on the efficacy and safety of four approved LABA/LAMA fixed-dose 
combinations: indacaterol/glycopyrronium, vilanterol/umeclidinium, 
formoterol/aclidinium, and olodaterol/tiotropium. Additionally, in this review 
we describe the rationale behind the use of LABA/LAMA FDC therapy, key findings 
from the preclinical and clinical trial evaluation of respective LABA and LAMA 
monocomponents, and the efficacy and safety of LABA/LAMA FDCs. Special emphasis 
is placed on the clinical evidence for the monocomponents and LABA/LAMA FDCs 
from the Asian population. This detailed overview of the efficacy and safety of 
LABA/LAMA FDCs in global and Asian COPD patients is envisaged to provide a 
better understanding of the benefits of these therapies and to inform healthcare 
providers and patients on their appropriate use.Funding: Novartis Pharma K.K.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-019-0893-3
PMCID: PMC6824447
PMID: 30742242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Respir Med. 2016 Nov;120:54-63. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.09.015. Epub 2016 Sep 
22.

Incidence of oral thrush in patients with COPD prescribed inhaled 
corticosteroids: Effect of drug, dose, and device.

Dekhuijzen PNR(1), Batsiou M(2), Bjermer L(3), Bosnic-Anticevich S(4), Chrystyn 
H(5), Papi A(6), Rodríguez-Roisin R(7), Fletcher M(8), Wood L(9), Cifra A(2), 
Soriano JB(10), Price DB(11).

Author information:
(1)Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Cambridge Research Support Ltd, Cambridge, UK; Observational and Pragmatic 
Research Institute Pte Ltd, Singapore.
(3)Lung Medicine and Allergology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
Australia.
(5)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd, Singapore; Faculty of 
Health and Human Sciences, Plymouth University, Plymouth, UK.
(6)Respiratory Diseases Unit, Department of Medical Sciences, University of 
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(7)Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Education for Health, Warwick, UK.
(9)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd, Singapore.
(10)Instituto de Investigación Hospital Universitario de la Princesa (IISP), 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(11)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd, Singapore; Academic 
Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, UK. Electronic address: dprice@opri.sg.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Little information is available on real-life occurrence of 
oral thrush in COPD patients treated with ICS. We investigated oral thrush 
incidence in COPD patients prescribed FDC ICS/LABA therapies and assessed 
whether it is modulated by the ICS type, dose, and delivery device.
METHODS: We conducted a historical, observational, matched cohort study (one 
baseline year before and one outcome year after initiation of therapy) using 
data from the UK Optimum Patient Care Research Database. We assessed oral thrush 
incidence in patients initiating long-acting bronchodilators or FDC ICS/LABA 
therapy. We then compared different combination therapies (budesonide/formoterol 
fumarate dihydrate [BUD/FOR] and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate 
[FP/SAL]) and devices (DPI and pMDI).
RESULTS: Patients prescribed FDC ICS/LABA had significantly greater odds of 
experiencing oral thrush than those prescribed long-acting bronchodilators alone 
(adjusted OR 2.18 [95% CI 1.84-2.59]). Significantly fewer patients prescribed 
BUD/FOR DPI developed oral thrush compared with FP/SAL DPI (OR 0.77 [0.63-0.94]) 
when allowing for differences in prescribed doses between the drugs. A 
significantly smaller proportion of patients developed oral thrush in the FP/SAL 
pMDI arm than in the FP/SAL DPI arm (OR 0.67 [0.55-0.82]). Additionally, in the 
FP/SAL cohort (both DPI and pMDI), increased risk of oral thrush was 
significantly associated with high ICS daily dose (OR 1.97 [1.22-3.17] vs low 
daily dose).
CONCLUSIONS: ICS use increases oral thrush incidence in COPD and this effect is 
dose-dependent for FP/SAL therapies. Of the therapies assessed, FP/SAL pMDI and 
BUD/FOR DPI may be more protective against oral thrush.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.09.015
PMID: 27817816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Mar 18;10:613-23. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S77144. eCollection 2015.

Early impact of treatment with tiotropium, long acting beta agonists 
preparation, in patients with COPD - real-life experience from an observational 
study.

Jahnz-Różyk K(1), Szepiel P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Clinical Allergology, Military Institute of 
Medicine, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Sp. z o.o., Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting inhaled bronchodilators, including anticholinergic 
tiotropium, are recommended for the maintenance therapy of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). It has been shown in a number of studies that 
treatment with tiotropium alleviates symptoms, improves exercise tolerance, 
health status, and reduces exacerbations in patients with moderate to very 
severe stage COPD.
AIM: The aim of this noninterventional study was to observe the early effects of 
the maintenance treatment with tiotropium in patients with COPD of different 
severities, who had been previously treated on a regular basis, or as required, 
with at least one short-acting bronchodilator, in a real-life setting in Poland. 
The effect of the treatment was assessed through the collection of COPD 
Assessment Test (CAT) data.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The MATHS clinical study was an observational, 
noninterventional, open-label, prospective, uncontrolled, single-arm, 
postmarketing, surveillance, real-life study conducted with the involvement of 
236 pulmonology clinics based in Poland. The tiotropium observational period was 
3 months. The health and COPD status was measured with the CAT questionnaire. 
The primary efficacy endpoint was the mean change from the baseline in the total 
CAT score at the end of the 3-month observational period.
RESULTS: Patients treated with 18 μg of tiotropium once daily for 3 months 
showed a statistically significant result, with a clinically meaningful mean 
reduction (improvement) of 7.0 points in the total CAT score. The improvement 
was slightly greater in patients with more severe COPD; the mean change in the 
total CAT score was 7.6 in the subgroup of patients with more severe COPD and 
6.7 points in the subgroup of patients with moderate COPD.
CONCLUSION: Results of this real-life study provide further support for the use 
of tiotropium as a first-line maintenance treatment for patients with COPD of 
different severities in Poland.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S77144
PMCID: PMC4370685
PMID: 25834420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Sep;136(3):531-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.05.052.

Therapeutic approaches to asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap 
syndromes.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk.

The recognition that there are some patients with features of asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has highlighted the need to develop more 
specific treatments for these clinical phenotypes. Some patients with COPD have 
predominantly eosinophilic inflammation and might respond to high doses of 
inhaled corticosteroids and newly developed specific antieosinophil therapies, 
including blocking antibodies against IL-5, IL-13, IL-33, and thymic stromal 
lymphopoietin, as well as oral chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule 
expressed on TH2 cells antagonists. Other patients have severe asthma or are 
asthmatic patients who smoke with features of COPD-induced inflammation and 
might benefit from treatments targeting neutrophils, including macrolides, CXCR2 
antagonists, phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors, p38 mitogen-activating protein 
kinase inhibitors, and antibodies against IL-1 and IL-17. Other patients appear 
to have largely fixed obstruction with little inflammation and might respond to 
long-acting bronchodilators, including long acting muscarinic antagonists, to 
reduce hyperinflation. Highly selected patients with severe asthma might benefit 
from bronchial thermoplasty. Some patients with overlap syndromes can be 
conveniently treated with triple fixed-dose combination inhaler therapy with an 
inhaled corticosteroid, long-acting beta-agonist, and long acting muscarinic 
antagonist, several of which are now in development. Corticosteroid resistance 
is a feature of asthma-COPD overlap syndrome, and understanding the various 
molecular mechanisms of this resistance has identified novel therapeutic targets 
and presented the prospect of therapies that can restore corticosteroid 
responsiveness.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.05.052
PMID: 26343937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Oct 4;13:3115-3130. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S170606. eCollection 2018.

LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations in patients with COPD: a systematic review.

Rogliani P(1), Calzetta L(1), Braido F(2), Cazzola M(1), Clini E(3), Pelaia 
G(4), Rossi A(5), Scichilone N(6), Di Marco F(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome Tor 
Vergata, Rome, Italy, paola.rogliani@uniroma2.it.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, IRCCS San Martino Genoa University Hospital, 
Genoa, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio 
Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Section of Respiratory Diseases, 
Magna Græcia University, Catanzaro, Italy.
(5)Pulmonary Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(7)Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Respiratory 
Unit, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to assess the current evidence for 
long-acting beta-agonist (LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) in the treatment of COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic literature search of randomized controlled 
trials published in English up to September 2017 of LABA/LAMA FDCs vs LABA or 
LAMA or LABA/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) FDCs in COPD patients was performed 
using PubMed, Embase, Scopus, and Google Scholar. Outcomes including forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) scores, St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scores, exacerbations, exercise 
tolerance (endurance time [ET]), inspiratory capacity (IC), and rescue 
medication use were evaluated.
RESULTS: In total, 27 studies were included in the review. LABA/LAMA FDCs 
significantly improved lung function (FEV1) at 12 weeks compared with LABA or 
LAMA or LABA/ICS. These effects were maintained over time. Significant 
improvements with LABA/LAMA FDCs vs each evaluated comparator were also observed 
in TDI and SGRQ scores, even if significant differences between different 
LABA/LAMA FDCs were detected. Only the LABA/LAMA FDC indacaterol/glycopyrronium 
has shown superiority vs LAMA and LABA/ICS for reducing exacerbation rates, 
while olodaterol/tiotropium and indacaterol/glycopyrronium have been shown to 
improve ET and IC vs the active comparators. Rescue medication use was 
significantly reduced by LABA/LAMA FDCs vs the evaluated comparators. LABA/LAMA 
FDCs were safe, with no increase in the risk of adverse events with LABA/LAMA 
FDCs vs the monocomponents.
CONCLUSION: Evidence supporting the efficacy of LABA/LAMA FDCs for COPD is 
heterogeneous, particularly for TDI and SGRQ scores, exacerbation rates, ET, and 
IC. So far, indacaterol/glycopyrronium is the LABA/LAMA FDC that has the 
strongest evidence for superiority vs LABA, LAMA, and LABA/ICS FDCs across the 
evaluated outcomes. LABA/LAMA FDCs were safe; however, more data should be 
collected in a real-world setting to confirm their safety.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S170606
PMCID: PMC6174911
PMID: 30323582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure PR has participated as a lecturer, 
speaker, and/or advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship 
of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Group, Mundipharma, and Novartis. Her department has 
been funded by Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Zambon. LC has 
participated as advisor in scientific meetings under the sponsorship of 
Boehringer Ingelheim and Novartis, received non-financial support by 
AstraZeneca, received a research grant partially funded by Almirall, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, and Novartis, and has been a consultant to Edmond Pharma, Verona 
Pharma, and Zambon. His department has been funded by Almirall, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Novartis, and Zambon. FB has participated as a lecturer, speaker, 
and/or advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship of 
AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Dompè, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Lallemand Pharma, Malesci/Guidotti, Menarini Group, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Teva, and Zambon. EC has participated as a lecturer, 
speaker, and/or advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship 
of AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Guidotti/Malesci, Linde, Menarini Group, 
and Novartis, and has received financial support for research and for congress 
attendance from Boehringer Ingelheim, Medical Products Research, and Novartis. 
GP has participated as a lecturer, speaker, and/or advisor in scientific 
meetings and courses under the sponsorship of AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Dompè, GlaxoSmithKline, Malesci/Guidotti, 
Menarini Group, Mundipharma, Novartis, Teva, and Zambon. AR has participated as 
a lecturer, speaker, and/or advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the 
sponsorship of AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi 
Farmaceutici, Menarini Group, and Novartis. NS has participated as a lecturer, 
speaker, and/or advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship 
of AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Guidotti/Malesci, 
Menarini Group, Mundipharma, Teva, and Zambon, and has received financial 
support for research and for congress attendance from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Guidotti/Malesci, and Novartis. FDM has 
participated as a lecturer, speaker, and/or advisor in scientific meetings and 
courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi Farmaceutici, Dompè, Guidotti/Malesci, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Group, 
Novartis, and Zambon, and has received financial support for research from 
Novartis. MC has participated as a lecturer, speaker, and/or advisor in 
scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, 
Biofutura, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Dey, GlaxoS-mithKline, 
Kamada, Lallemand Pharma, Menarini Group, Mundipharma, Novartis, Ockham Biotech, 
Pfizer, Skyepharma, Stallergenes, Teva, Verona Pharma, and Zambon. The authors 
report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


90. Chest. 2019 Apr;155(4):758-770. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.12.016. Epub 2019 Jan 
17.

Adding a LAMA to ICS/LABA Therapy: A Meta-analysis of Triple Combination Therapy 
in COPD.

Calzetta L(1), Cazzola M(2), Matera MG(3), Rogliani P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata," Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata," Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine (Dr Matera), Unit of Pharmacology, 
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli," Naples, Italy.

Comment in
    Chest. 2019 May;155(5):1078-1079.
    Chest. 2019 May;155(5):1079-1080.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) 
combination is commonly prescribed to treat COPD; therefore, we performed a 
meta-analysis on the effect of adding a long acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonist (LAMA) to ICS/LABA combination in COPD.
METHODS: Studies were identified by searching in different databases the 
randomized controlled trials that investigated the effect of ICS/LABA/LAMA 
combination in COPD. The primary end points were the effect of triple therapy on 
trough FEV1, risk of acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD), and risk of 
cardiovascular serious adverse events (SAEs), compared with ICS/LABA 
combination. The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and 
Evaluation system was used to assess the quality of evidence.
RESULTS: Thirteen randomized controlled trials including 15,519 patients with 
COPD (ICS/LABA/LAMA combination, 53.1%; ICS/LABA combination, 46.9%) were 
meta-analyzed. ICS/LABA/LAMA combination improved trough FEV1 (mean 
difference, +104.86 mL; 95% CI, 86.74-122.99; high quality of evidence) and 
protected against AECOPD (relative risk, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.71-0.85; high quality 
of evidence) vs ICS/LABA combination. For every approximately four patients 
treated with triple therapy, one increased FEV1 > 100 mL, and approximately 26 
patients had to be treated for 1 year with ICS/LABA/LAMA combination to prevent 
one AECOPD, compared with ICS/LABA combination. Adding a LAMA to ICS/LABA 
therapy did not modulate the risk of cardiovascular SAEs (moderate quality of 
evidence).
CONCLUSIONS: Triple therapy provides significant clinical benefit in patients 
with COPD on ICS/LABA combination. ICS/LABA therapy can be escalated to triple 
therapy without a real risk to increase cardiovascular SAEs when a LAMA is added 
to the combination.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: CRD42018095300; URL: 
www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.12.016
PMID: 30660781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Lancet Respir Med. 2018 Nov;6(11):855-862. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(18)30368-0. 
Epub 2018 Oct 18.

Comparative effectiveness of LABA-ICS versus LAMA as initial treatment in COPD 
targeted by blood eosinophils: a population-based cohort study.

Suissa S(1), Dell'Aniello S(2), Ernst P(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General 
Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of Medicine, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC H3T 1E2, Canada. Electronic address: 
samy.suissa@mcgill.ca.
(2)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General 
Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General 
Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of Medicine, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC H3T 1E2, Canada.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2018 Nov;6(11):807-808.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta agonists (LABAs) and long acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMAs) are the recommended initial maintenance treatment for 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), with almost all LABAs dispensed in 
fixed combination with inhaled corticosteroids (LABA-ICS). We compared the 
effectiveness and safety of LABA-ICS versus LAMA treatment initiation as a 
function of blood eosinophilia, a potential biomarker of ICS effectiveness, in a 
real-world setting.
METHODS: In this population-based cohort study, we identified a cohort of 
patients with COPD initiating treatment with a LAMA or LABA-ICS during 2002-15, 
age 55 years or older, from the UK's Clinical Practice Research Datalink. We 
excluded patients who initiated treatment with both bronchodilators on the same 
date. All patients required at least 1 year of medical history and a measure of 
blood eosinophil concentration before cohort entry, defined by the date of the 
first cohort-defining bronchodilator prescription. Patients initiating a LAMA 
were matched on high-dimensional propensity scores with patients initiating a 
LABA-ICS. They were followed up for 1 year for the occurrence of a moderate or 
severe COPD exacerbation and for severe pneumonia. Sensitivity analyses 
included, among others, repeating the analysis among patients with two blood 
eosinophil concentration measures and stratification by concurrent asthma and 
previous exacerbations.
FINDINGS: The base cohort included 539 643 patients with a prescription for 
LABAs or LAMAs from Jan 1, 2002, to Dec 31, 2015, of whom 18 500 were initiated 
on LABA-ICS and 13 870 on LAMAs. Propensity score analysis resulted in 12 366 
initiators of LAMAs (mainly tiotropium) matched to 12 366 initiators of 
LABA-ICS. The hazard ratio (HR) of COPD exacerbation associated with LABA-ICS 
initiation, relative to LAMA initiation, was 0·95 (95% CI 0·90-1·01). In 
patients with blood eosinophil concentrations of less than 2% of white blood 
cell count, the HR was 1·03 (95% CI 0·93-1·13) and for those with eosinophil 
concentrations of 2-4%, the HR was 1·00 (0·91-1·10). For patients with 
eosinophil concentrations of more than 4%, the HR was 0·79 (0·70-0·88). The 
incidence of pneumonia increased with LABA-ICS initiation (HR 1·37 [95% CI 
1·17-1·60]) and was similar across all eosinophil concentrations. Sensitivity 
analyses were consistent with these findings, but the incidence of exacerbation 
with LABA-ICS among the 2766 (11%) of all 24 732 patients with two or more COPD 
exacerbations during the baseline year was marginally lower (HR 0·87 [95% CI 
0·79-0·97]).
INTERPRETATION: In this real-world, clinical practice, observational study, 
initial COPD treatment with LABA-ICS inhalers was only more effective than with 
LAMAs in patients with high blood eosinophil concentrations (>4%) or counts 
(>300 cells per μL) and possibly in frequent exacerbators. Because of the 
increased risk of pneumonia associated with the ICS component, initiation with a 
LAMA should be preferred in patients with blood eosinophil concentrations of 
less than 4%.
FUNDING: Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Canadian Foundation for 
Innovation.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(18)30368-0
PMID: 30343028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Ann Pharmacother. 2017 Nov;51(11):945-953. doi: 10.1177/1060028017719716. Epub 
2017 Jul 5.

Risk of Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Events in COPD Patients Treated With 
Long-Acting β(2)-Agonist Combined With a long acting muscarinic or Inhaled 
Corticosteroid.

Samp JC(1), Joo MJ(1), Schumock GT(1), Calip GS(1), Pickard AS(1), Lee TA(1).

Author information:
(1)1 University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: The recent approval of several fixed-dose combination long-acting 
beta-agonist (LABA) and long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) products has 
increased the use of dual bronchodilators in the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Understanding the comparative safety of 
this combination is important for informing treatment decisions.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the risk of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular (CCV) 
events associated with LABA/LAMA compared with a combination of LABA and inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS).
METHODS: This was a retrospective, observational cohort study using health 
insurance claims data to identify COPD patients initiating LABA/LAMA or 
LABA/ICS. CCV outcomes included hospitalizations with a primary diagnosis for 
acute coronary syndrome, heart failure, cardiac dysrhythmia, stroke, or 
transient ischemic attack. Patients were followed until they experienced an 
event, discontinued treatment, initiated medication from the opposite cohort, or 
lost enrollment. Patients were matched 1:4 on propensity scores, and time to 
event was compared using Cox proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: After matching, there were 3842 patients in the LABA/LAMA cohort and 
15 225 in the LABA/ICS cohort. Cardiovascular events in the LABA/LAMA cohort 
were lower than in the LABA/ICS: hazard ratio (HR) = 0.794; 95% CI = 
0.623-0.997. No significant difference in the risk of cerebrovascular events (HR 
= 1.166; 95% CI = 0.653-1.959) was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite concerns about the CCV effects of LAMA and LABA 
monotherapy, the LABA/LAMA combination had similar or lower risk of these events 
in comparison to LABA/ICS. Further studies are recommended to confirm these 
findings.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028017719716
PMID: 28677404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017 Jul;65(7):388-391. doi: 
10.1007/s11748-017-0761-5. Epub 2017 Mar 9.

Preoperative management using inhalation therapy for pulmonary complications in 
lung cancer patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Takegahara K(1), Usuda J(2), Inoue T(1), Ibi T(1), Sato A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5 Sendagi, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8603, Japan.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5 Sendagi, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8603, Japan. jusuda@nms.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate whether perioperative inhalations of 
long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) or long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) 
might decrease the incidence of postoperative complications in lung cancer 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 108 patients with COPD who underwent 
pulmonary resections for primary lung cancer at our hospital between January 
2013 and January 2016 to determine the association between the incidence of 
postoperative complications (e.g., prolonged air leakage and pneumonia) and the 
use of LABAs or LAMAs.
RESULTS: Thirty patients with COPD experienced postoperative complications 
(27.8%): Fourteen patients had prolonged air leakages (more than 7 days), ten 
patients developed pneumonia. The frequency of these postoperative pulmonary 
complications was significantly higher among the patients with COPD (24/108 
cases, 22.2%), compared with the frequency among non-COPD patients (15/224 
cases, 6.7%). Inhaled bronchodilators, such as LAMA or LABA, were prescribed for 
34 of the 108 patients with COPD; the remaining 74 patients were not treated 
with bronchodilators. Pulmonary complications were significant lower among the 
LAMA or LABA users (3/34 cases, 8.8%) than among the untreated COPD patients 
(21/74 cases, 28.4%).
CONCLUSION: For lung cancer patients with COPD, preoperative management using 
LABA or LAMA bronchodilators and smoking cessation can reduce the frequency of 
postoperative pulmonary complications after surgical lung resection. LAMA or 
LABA inhalation might be useful for not only perioperative care, but also for 
the long-term survival of COPD patients after surgery.

DOI: 10.1007/s11748-017-0761-5
PMCID: PMC5486589
PMID: 28281043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors have declared no competing 
interest.


94. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Nov 10;11(11):CD011600. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011600.pub2.

Inhaled corticosteroids with combination inhaled long-acting beta(2)-agonists 
and long acting muscarinic antagonists for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Tan DJ(1), White CJ, Walters JA, Walters EH.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011600.

BACKGROUND: Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) commonly 
involves long-acting bronchodilators including beta-agonists (LABA) and 
muscarinic antagonists (LAMA). In individuals with persistent symptoms or 
frequent exacerbations, inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are also used. LABA and 
LAMA bronchodilators are now available in single combination inhalers. However, 
the benefits and risks of adding ICS to combination LABA/LAMA inhalers remains 
unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effect of adding an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) to 
combination long-acting beta₂-agonist (LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) inhalers for the treatment of stable COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We carried out searches using the Cochrane Airways Group 
Specialised Register of Trials (searched 20 September 2016), Cochrane Central 
Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; 2015, Issue 12) in the Cochrane Library 
(searched 15 December 2015) and MEDLINE (searched 15 December 2015). We also 
searched ClinicalTrials.gov, World Health Organisation (WHO) trials portal and 
pharmaceutical company clinical trials' databases up to 7 Janurary 2016.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group, randomised controlled trials 
(RCTs) of three weeks' duration or longer which compared treatment of stable 
COPD with ICS in addition to combination LABA/LAMA inhalers against combination 
LABA/LAMA inhalers alone.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures 
expected by Cochrane.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified a total of 586 records in our search. Following 
removal of duplicates, 386 abstracts were assessed for inclusion. Six studies 
were identified as potentially relevant; however, all failed to meet the 
inclusion criteria on full-text assessment or after contacting the corresponding 
author to clarify study characteristics.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There are currently no studies published assessing the 
effect of ICS in addition to combination LABA/LAMA inhalers for the treatment of 
stable COPD. As combination LABA/LAMA inhalers are now widely available, there 
is a need for well-designed RCTs to investigate whether ICS provides any added 
therapeutic benefit.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011600.pub2
PMCID: PMC6464947
PMID: 27830584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J Walters received funding from Menarini for 
conference travel. The grant was awarded by Lung Foundation Australia via a 
competitive process that was not influenced by Menarini. EH Walters received 
payment from GSK for educational seminars for healthcare practitioners and an 
institutional research grant from Boehringer Ingelheim for unrelated work. No 
conflicts of interest are known for DJ Tan and CJ White. See also Published 
notes.


95. Respir Res. 2016 Sep 10;17(1):112. doi: 10.1186/s12931-016-0425-5.

Pharmacological strategies to reduce exacerbation risk in COPD: a narrative 
review.

Miravitlles M(1), D'Urzo A(2), Singh D(3), Koblizek V(4).

Author information:
(1)Pneumology Department, Hospital General Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Pg. Vall 
d'Hebron 119-129, 08035, Barcelona, Spain. mmiravitlles@vhebron.net.
(2)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, 1670 
Dufferin Street, Suite 107, Toronto, ON, M6H 3M2, Canada.
(3)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of 
South Manchester Foundation Trust, Southmoor Road, Manchester, M23 9QZ, UK.
(4)Department of Pneumology, Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Medicine 
in Hradec Kralove, Simkova 870, Hradec Kralove 1, 500 38, Czech Republic.

Identifying patients at risk of exacerbations and managing them appropriately to 
reduce this risk represents an important clinical challenge. Numerous treatments 
have been assessed for the prevention of exacerbations and their efficacy may 
differ by patient phenotype. Given their centrality in the treatment of COPD, 
there is strong rationale for maximizing bronchodilation as an initial strategy 
to reduce exacerbation risk irrespective of patient phenotype. Therefore, in 
patients assessed as frequent exacerbators (>1 exacerbation/year) we propose 
initial bronchodilator treatment with a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA)/ long-acting beta-agonist (LABA). For those patients who continue to 
experience >1 exacerbation/year despite maximal bronchodilation, we advocate 
treating according to patient phenotype. Based on currently available data on 
adding inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) to a LABA, ICS might be added to a 
LABA/LAMA combination in exacerbating patients who have an asthma-COPD overlap 
syndrome or high blood eosinophil counts, while in exacerbators with chronic 
bronchitis, consideration should be given to treating with a phosphodiesterase 
(PDE)-4 inhibitor (roflumilast) or high-dose mucolytic agents. For those 
patients who experience frequent bacterial exacerbations and/or bronchiectasis, 
addition of mucolytic agents or a macrolide antibiotic (e.g. azithromycin) 
should be considered. In all patients at risk of exacerbations, pulmonary 
rehabilitation should be included as part of a comprehensive management plan.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-016-0425-5
PMCID: PMC5018159
PMID: 27613392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2017 Nov 1;123(5):1266-1275. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.00493.2017. Epub 2017 Aug 3.

Acute effects of long-acting bronchodilators on small airways detected in COPD 
patients by single-breath N(2) test and lung P-V curve.

Pecchiari M(1), Santus P(2), Radovanovic D(2), DʼAngelo E(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia e dei Trapianti, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy; and.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Cliniche, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Division of Respiratory Diseases, "L. Sacco" Hospital, Azienda 
Socio-Sanitaria Territoriale Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milan, Italy.

Small airways represent the key factor of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) pathophysiology. The effect of different classes of bronchodilators on 
small airways is still poorly understood and difficult to assess. Hence the 
acute effects of tiotropium (18 µg) and indacaterol (150 µg) on closing volume 
(CV) and ventilation inhomogeneity were investigated and compared in 51 stable 
patients (aged 70 ± 7 yr, mean ± SD; 82% men) with moderate to very severe COPD. 
Patients underwent body plethysmography, arterial blood gas analysis, tidal 
expiratory flow limitation (EFL), dyspnea assessment, and simultaneous recording 
of single-breath N2 test and transpulmonary pressure-volume curve (PL-V), before 
and 1 h after drug administration. The effects produced by indacaterol on each 
variable did not differ from those caused by tiotropium, independent of the 
severity of disease, assessed according to the Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (GOLD) scale and the presence of EFL. 
Bronchodilators significantly decreased the slope of phase III and CV (-5 ± 4 
and -2.5 ± 2.1%, respectively, both P < 0.001), with an increase in both slope 
and height of phase IV and of the anatomical dead space. Arterial oxygen 
pressure and saturation significantly improved (3 ± 3 mmHg and 2 ± 2%, 
respectively, both P < 0.001); their changes negatively correlated with those of 
phase III slope (r = -0.659 and r = -0.454, respectively, both P < 0.01). The 
vital capacity (VC) increased substantially, but the PL-V/VC curve above CV was 
unaffected. In conclusion, bronchodilators reduce the heterogeneity of 
peripheral airway mechanical properties and the extent of their closure, with 
minor effects on critical closing pressure. This should lessen the risk of 
small-airway damage and positively affect gas exchange.NEW & NOTEWORTHY This is 
the first study investigating in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
patients the acute effects of two long-acting bronchodilators, a β-agonist and a 
muscarinic antagonist, on peripheral airways using simultaneous lung 
pressure-volume curve and single-breath N2 test. By lessening airway mechanical 
property heterogeneity, both drugs similarly reduced ventilation inhomogeneity 
and extent of small-airway closure, as indicated by the decrease of phase III 
slope, increased oxygen saturation, and fall of closing volume, often below 
expiratory reserve volume.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00493.2017
PMID: 28775071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Apr 11;14:799-808. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S198288. eCollection 2019.

Relationship of inhaled long-acting bronchodilators with cardiovascular outcomes 
among patients with stable COPD: a meta-analysis and systematic review of 43 
randomized trials.

Li C(1), Cheng W(2), Guo J(1), Guan W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory, Affiliated Hospital of Qinghai University, Xining, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Qinghai University, Xining, 
People's Republic of China.

Background: long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) and long-acting 
beta-agonists (LABAs) are the mainstay of maintenance therapy for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Although previous studies have supported 
inhaled long-acting bronchodilators (ILABs) for overall cardiovascular safety, 
the risk of specific cardiovascular outcomes such as arrhythmia, heart failure 
and stroke is still unknown. Materials and methods: We systematically searched 
from PubMed, the Embase database and the Cochrane Library for published studies 
on ILABs and COPD, from its inception to November 10, 2018, with no language 
restrictions. The RRs and corresponding 95% CIs were pooled to evaluate 
ILAB/placebo. Results: Finally, 43 randomized controlled trials were included. 
Compared with placebo, ILABs do not increase the risk of overall and specific 
cardiovascular adverse events (AEs); on the contrary, they can reduce the 
incidence of hypertension (RR 0.73, 95% CI 0.55-0.98;I219.9%; P= 0.221). 
However, when stratified according to the specific agents of ILABs, olodaterol 
might reduce the risk of overall cardiovascular adverse events (OCAEs) (RR 0.65, 
95% CI 0.49-0.88;I227.5%; P= 0.000), and the protective effect of lowing blood 
pressure disappeared. Similarly, the use of inhaled LABA might increase the risk 
of cardiac failure (RR 1.71, 95% CI 1.04-2.84;I20%; P= 0.538), but this risk 
disappeared when stratified according to the specific agents of LABA. Besides, 
formoterol might decrease the risk of cardiac ischemia (RR 0.53, 95% CI 
0.32-0.91; I20%; P= 0.676). Conclusions: Overall, the use of ILABs was not 
associated with overall cardiovascular AEs in patients with stable COPD. When 
stratified according to the specific agents of LABA, olodaterol might reduce the 
risk of OCAE; and formoterol might decrease the risk of cardiac ischemia. LABA 
might reduce the incidence of hypertension, but might increase the risk of heart 
failure. Therefore, COPD patients with a history of heart failure should use it 
with caution.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S198288
PMCID: PMC6489598
PMID: 31114181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


98. Ann Pharmacother. 2017 Aug;51(8):696-705. doi: 10.1177/1060028017705149. Epub 
2017 Apr 14.

Role of long acting muscarinic Antagonist/Long-Acting β(2)-Agonist Therapy in 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Petite SE(1).

Author information:
(1)1 University of Toledo College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Toledo, OH, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the available literature regarding the use of long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting beta agonists (LABA) and inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS)/LABA combination inhaler therapy in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) maintenance therapy management.
DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE literature search from database inception to February 
2017 was conducted using the search terms chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
adrenergic beta-agonist, muscarinic antagonist, and inhaled corticosteroid. 
References from extracted sources were further searched for any relevant, missed 
data sources.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All English-language randomized-controlled 
trials comparing LAMA/LABA and ICS/LABA combination inhaler therapy were 
evaluated.
DATA SYNTHESIS: A total of 10 randomized controlled trials have reviewed the use 
of LAMA/LABA compared with ICS/LABA therapy for COPD maintenance therapy. 
Results of clinical trials that evaluated LAMA/LABA and ICS/LABA maintenance 
therapy demonstrated superior improvements in pulmonary function tests via 
spirometry and improved clinical outcomes with LAMA/LABA therapy, specifically 
reduction in COPD exacerbation rates. The safety of LAMA/LABA combination 
therapy also is favorable compared with ICS/LABA combination therapy because of 
the increased infection risk with ICS therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: COPD is a disease state with significant morbidity and mortality in 
the United States and is the third leading cause of death. Long-acting inhalers 
are recommended for the majority of COPD severities, and combination therapy is 
typically utilized. LAMA/LABA combination therapy has demonstrated superior 
improvements in pulmonary function and reduction in COPD exacerbation rates 
compared with ICS/LABA. LAMA/LABA combination therapy will have a larger future 
role in COPD maintenance management.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028017705149
PMID: 28410560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jan 19;12:339-349. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S125058. eCollection 2017.

Indacaterol/glycopyrronium versus salmeterol/fluticasone in Asian patients with 
COPD at a high risk of exacerbations: results from the FLAME study.

Wedzicha JA(1), Zhong N(2), Ichinose M(3), Humphries M(4), Fogel R(5), Thach 
C(5), Patalano F(6), Banerji D(5).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research 
Center of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(4)Beijing Novartis Pharma Co. Ltd., Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(6)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The FLAME study demonstrated that indacaterol/glycopyrronium 
(IND/GLY), the fixed-dose combination of a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA, IND) 
and a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA, GLY), was superior to 
salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC) in preventing exacerbations in COPD 
patients with a high risk of exacerbations. In this study, we report a 
prespecified analysis of the efficacy and safety of IND/GLY versus SFC in Asian 
patients from the FLAME study.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients from Asian centers with moderate-to-very severe 
COPD and ≥1 exacerbation in the previous year from the 52-week, randomized FLAME 
study were included. IND/GLY was compared versus SFC for effects on 
exacerbations, lung function (forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] and 
forced vital capacity [FVC]), health status (St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire [SGRQ]), rescue medication use, and safety.
RESULTS: A total of 510 Asian patients (IND/GLY, n=250 or SFC, n=260) were 
included. Compared to the overall FLAME population, the Asian cohort had more 
males, a shorter duration of COPD, fewer patients using inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS) at screening, fewer current smokers, and more patients with very severe 
COPD. IND/GLY significantly reduced the rate of moderate/severe exacerbations 
(rate ratio: 0.75; 95% confidence interval: 0.58-0.97; P=0.027) and prolonged 
time to first moderate/severe exacerbation versus SFC (hazard ratio: 0.77; 95% 
confidence interval: 0.59-1.01; P=0.055). Predose trough FEV1 and FVC 
significantly improved in Asian patients (P<0.001). IND/GLY improved SGRQ for 
COPD (SGRQ-C score; P=0.006) and reduced rescue medication use (P=0.058) at week 
52. Pneumonia incidence was 3.6% with IND/GLY and 7.7% with SFC (P=0.046).
CONCLUSION: In exacerbating Asian COPD patients, IND/GLY was more effective than 
SFC.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S125058
PMCID: PMC5261570
PMID: 28176893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JAW has received no honoraria from industry for 
lectures and/or advisory boards from January 2015. Prior to January 2015 she 
received honoraria for lectures and/or advisory boards from Novartis, GSK, Astra 
Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Takeda, and Johnson and Johnson. JAW has received 
research grant funding in the last 3 years from Johnson and Johnson, Takeda, 
GSK, and Vifor Pharma. MI has served on Scientific Advisory Boards for 
AstraZeneca, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novartis Pharma KK from January 
2015. MI has received honoraria for speaking from AstraZeneca, GSK, Nippon 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Kyorin, and Novartis Pharma in 2015. NZ does not have any 
competing interests to declare. MH, RF, CT, FP, and DB are Novartis employees. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


100. Respir Res. 2015 Jun 8;16(1):68. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0227-1.

V0162 a new long-acting bronchodilator for treatment of chronic obstructive lung 
diseases: preclinical and clinical results.

Devillier P(1), Garrigue E(2), D'Auzers G(3), Monjotin N(4), Similowski 
T(5)(6)(7), Clerc T(8).

Author information:
(1)UPRES EA 220, Hôpital Foch, Université de Versailles Saint Quentin, 11 rue 
Guillaume Lenoir, Suresnes, 92150, France. p.devillier@hopital-foch.org.
(2)Centre de Recherche et de Développement Pierre Fabre Toulouse, 3 Avenue 
Hubert Curien BP 13562, 31035, Toulouse, France. eric.garrigue@pierre-fabre.com.
(3)Centre de Recherche et de Développement Pierre Fabre Toulouse, 3 Avenue 
Hubert Curien BP 13562, 31035, Toulouse, France. 
guillaume.d.auzers@pierre-fabre.com.
(4)Institut de Recherche Pierre Fabre, Service de Pharmacologie, CEPC Bel Air de 
Campans, Castres Cedex, 81106, France. nicolas.monjotin@pierre-fabre.com.
(5)AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière Charles Foix, Service de 
Pneumologie et Réanimation Médicale (Département "R3S"), 47-83 Bd de l'Hôpital, 
F-75013, Paris, France. thomas.similowski@psl.aphp.fr.
(6)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Paris 06, UMR_S 1158 "Neurophysiologie 
Respiratoire Expérimentale et Clinique", F-75005, Paris, France. 
thomas.similowski@psl.aphp.fr.
(7)INSERM, UMR_S 1158 "Neurophysiologie Respiratoire Expérimentale et Clinique", 
F-75005, Paris, France. thomas.similowski@psl.aphp.fr.
(8)Centre de Recherche et de Développement Pierre Fabre Toulouse, 3 Avenue 
Hubert Curien BP 13562, 31035, Toulouse, France. thierry.clerc@pierre-fabre.com.

BACKGROUND: Long acting bronchodilators are the standard of care in the 
management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The aim of this 
study was to investigate the efficacy and safety of V0162, a novel 
anticholinergic agent with bronchodilator properties, in preclinical models and 
in patients with COPD.
METHODS: Guinea pigs were used to evaluate the impact of V0162 on the 
acetylcholine or histamine-induced bronchoconstriction. V0162 was also 
investigated in an allergic asthma model on ovalbumin-sensitized guinea pig. For 
clinical investigations, healthy volunteers were included in a dose-escalation, 
randomized, placebo-controlled phase I study to determine the maximal tolerated 
dose, followed by a randomized, placebo-controlled, cross-over phase II study in 
patients with COPD. V0162 was given via inhalation route. The objectives of the 
phase I/II study were to assess the safety and efficacy of V0162, in terms of 
bronchodilation and reduction in hyperinflation.
RESULTS: Preclinical results showed that V0162 was able to prevent 
bronchoconstriction induced either by acetylcholine or histamine. V0162 reversed 
the bronchoconstriction and airway inflammation caused by ovalbumin challenge in 
sensitized guinea pigs. In the healthy volunteers study, 88 subjects were 
enrolled: 66 received V0162 and 22 received placebo. No particular safety 
concerns were raised. The maximal tolerated dose was not reached and the dose 
escalation was stopped at 2400 μg. A total of 20 patients with COPD were then 
enrolled. All patients received a single-dose of V0162 1600 μg and of placebo in 
two alternating periods. In COPD patients, V0162 demonstrated a significant 
increase in FEV1 compared with placebo (148 ± 137 ml vs. 36 ± 151 ml, 
p = 0.003). This bronchodilatory effect was corroborated by a reduction in 
hyperinflation. There was a trend toward dyspnea relief (change in visual analog 
scale at 22 h, -15.1 ± 26.0 mm vs.- 5.3 ± 28.8 mm with placebo, p = 0.054). No 
serious adverse events (AEs) were reported. Most common AEs were productive and 
non-productive cough, dyspnea and pruritus.
CONCLUSIONS: V0162 improved pulmonary function and tended to improve dyspnea in 
patients with COPD over more than 24 h. The slight plasmatic exposure observed 
might support the good safety profile.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01348555.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0227-1
PMCID: PMC4462001
PMID: 26050967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Aug 3;12:2291-2305. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S138554. eCollection 2017.

When is dual bronchodilation indicated in COPD?

Thomas M(1), Halpin DM(2), Miravitlles M(3).

Author information:
(1)Primary Care and Population Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, 
UK.
(3)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 
Barcelona, Spain.

Inhaled bronchodilator medications are central to the management of COPD and are 
frequently given on a regular basis to prevent or reduce symptoms. While 
short-acting bronchodilators are a treatment option for people with relatively 
few COPD symptoms and at low risk of exacerbations, for the majority of patients 
with significant breathlessness at the time of diagnosis, long-acting 
bronchodilators may be required. Dual bronchodilation with a long-acting 
beta-agonist and long acting muscarinic antagonist may be more effective treatment 
for some of these patients, with the aim of improving symptoms. This combination 
may also reduce the rate of exacerbations compared with a bronchodilator-inhaled 
corticosteroid combination in those with a history of exacerbations. However, 
there is currently a lack of guidance on clinical indicators suggesting which 
patients should step up from mono- to dual bronchodilation. In this article, we 
discuss a number of clinical indicators that could prompt a patient and 
physician to consider treatment escalation, while being mindful of the need to 
avoid unnecessary polypharmacy. These indicators include insufficient 
symptomatic response, a sustained increased requirement for rescue medication, 
suboptimal 24-hour symptom control, deteriorating symptoms, the occurrence of 
exacerbations, COPD-related hospitalization, and reductions in lung function. 
Future research is required to provide a better understanding of the optimal 
timing and benefits of treatment escalation and to identify the appropriate 
tools to inform this decision.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S138554
PMCID: PMC5546730
PMID: 28814857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure MT has received speaker’s fees from 
Aerocrine, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, and 
Teva, and received consulting fees from Aerocrine, Almirall, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, MSD, and Novartis. MM has 
received speaker’s fees from Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Grifols, Menarini, Gebro Pharma, and Zambon, and consulting 
fees from Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Cipla, and Grifols. DMGH has received speaker’s fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Pfizer, and consulting fees 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, and 
Pfizer. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


102. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Apr;31:68-78. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.02.007. Epub 
2015 Feb 26.

Assessing the clinical value of fast onset and sustained duration of action of 
long-acting bronchodilators for COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Beeh KM(2), Price D(3), Roche N(4).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Systems Medicine, 
and Postgraduate School of Respiratory Medicine, University of Rome 'Tor 
Vergata', Via Montpellier 1, 00133, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.
(2)Insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Biebricher Allee 34, D-65187 Wiesbaden, 
Germany. Electronic address: k.beeh@insaf-wi.de.
(3)Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of 
Aberdeen, Polwarth Building, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK. Electronic address: 
dprice@rirl.org.
(4)Service de Pneumologie AP-HP, University Paris Descartes (EA2511), Groupe 
Hospitalier Cochin, HIA du Val de Grâce 4e C, 74 Bd de Port Royal, F-75005 
Paris, France. Electronic address: nicolas.roche@cch.aphp.fr.

The long-acting inhaled bronchodilators available for use in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) vary in their pharmacological class (beta-adrenergic 
agonist or antimuscarinic/anticholinergic, alone or combined), durations of 
action and speed of onset of bronchodilator effect. In the early stages of 
development of a maintenance bronchodilator, the goals are to identify a 
molecule with the theoretically 'ideal' profile of fast onset and prolonged 
duration of action in comparison with existing agents, while minimizing 
non-specific activity at organs outside the lungs. The move towards increasing 
duration of bronchodilator action is generally paralleled by improved effects on 
clinical outcomes, and the advent of more potent agents seems likely to provide 
an opportunity to reduce overreliance on the use of inhaled corticosteroids in 
treating COPD. In terms of onset of action, an immediately perceived benefit in 
reducing dyspnea, although not definitively demonstrated, might prove useful in 
increasing adherence, which is very poor among patients with COPD. Once-daily 
administration may also be helpful in this respect. Shared decision-making 
between patient and physician in the choice of treatment is important in 
optimizing adherence and, thus, treatment effectiveness.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.02.007
PMID: 25727846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Drug Discov Today. 2018 Jan;23(1):196-203. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2017.10.015. 
Epub 2017 Oct 24.

Indacaterol/glycopyrronium: a dual bronchodilator for COPD.

Banerji D(1), Fogel R(2), Patalano F(3).

Author information:
(1)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. Electronic 
address: donald.banerji@novartis.com.
(2)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(3)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

Indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) 110/50mcg was the first once-daily, 
long-acting beta-agonist (LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
fixed-dose combination (FDC) approved in Europe for the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Development of IND/GLY was driven by the 
need to improve the standard of care for patients with this disease, in terms of 
symptom control and exacerbation frequency. IGNITE, an adaptive, comprehensive, 
and innovative Phase 3 development program, demonstrated the efficacy of IND/GLY 
in optimising bronchodilation, reducing symptoms, and reducing exacerbations in 
patients with COPD. IGNITE challenged contemporary thinking about the 
pharmacological treatment and management of patients with this disease.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2017.10.015
PMID: 29079130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. AAPS PharmSciTech. 2018 Feb;19(2):837-844. doi: 10.1208/s12249-017-0891-1. Epub 
2017 Oct 10.

Drug Delivery from an Innovative LAMA/LABA Co-suspension Delivery Technology 
Fixed-Dose Combination MDI: Evidence of Consistency, Robustness, and 
Reliability.

Doty A(1), Schroeder J(2), Vang K(1), Sommerville M(1), Taylor M(1), Flynn B(1), 
Lechuga-Ballesteros D(2), Mack P(3).

Author information:
(1)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., 4222 Emperor Blvd, Suite 560, Durham, North 
Carolina, 27703, USA.
(2)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., Redwood City, California, USA.
(3)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., 4222 Emperor Blvd, Suite 560, Durham, North 
Carolina, 27703, USA. peter.mack@astrazeneca.com.

Erratum in
    AAPS PharmSciTech. 2018 Aug;19(6):2753.

To ensure consistency of clinical outcomes, orally inhaled therapies must 
exhibit consistent delivered dose and aerosol properties at the time of 
manufacturing, throughout storage, and during various patient-use conditions. 
Achieving consistency across these scenarios has presented a significant 
challenge, especially for combination products that contain more than one drug. 
This study characterized the delivered dose and aerosol properties of 
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI; Bevespi 
Aerosphere™). GFF MDI, a fixed-dose combination (FDC) of a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist, glycopyrrolate (18 μg, equivalent to glycopyrronium 
14.4 μg), and a long-acting beta-agonist, formoterol fumarate (9.6 μg; equivalent 
to formoterol fumarate dihydrate 10 μg), is formulated using innovative 
co-suspension delivery technology, which suspends micronized drug crystals with 
spray-dried phospholipid porous particles in hydrofluoroalkane propellant. In 
this study, delivered dose uniformity was assessed through the labeled number of 
doses, and aerosol properties, such as percent fine particle fraction (FPF) and 
mass median aerodynamic diameter, were determined by cascade impaction. GFF MDI 
achieved reproducible dose delivery and an FPF greater than 55%, whether 
formulated and delivered as a monocomponent or dual FDC. The performance of GFF 
MDI was maintained across various manufacturing batches, under extended storage, 
and with variations in flow rate. Furthermore, unlike a GFF drug crystal-only 
suspension, drug delivery remained consistent for GFF MDI when simulated 
patient-handling errors were applied, such as reduced shake energy and delays 
between shaking and actuation. These results demonstrate that co-suspension 
delivery technology overcomes well-known sources of variability in MDI drug 
delivery.

DOI: 10.1208/s12249-017-0891-1
PMID: 29019170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Aug 17;12:2445-2454. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S141409. eCollection 2017.

The comparative effectiveness of initiating fluticasone/salmeterol combination 
therapy via pMDI versus DPI in reducing exacerbations and treatment escalation 
in COPD: a UK database study.

Jones R(1), Martin J(2), Thomas V(3), Skinner D(4), Marshall J(5), Stagno 
d'Alcontres M(2), Price D(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Trials and Health Research, Institute of Translational and 
Stratified Medicine, Plymouth University Peninsula School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Plymouth, UK.
(2)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute, Singapore.
(3)Cambridge Research Support, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Optimum Patient Care, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Mundipharma International Limited, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Centre for Academic Primary Care, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a complex progressive disease, is 
currently the third leading cause of death worldwide. One recommended treatment 
option is fixed-dose combination therapy of an inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS)/long-acting β-agonist. Clinical trials suggest pressurized metered-dose 
inhalers (pMDIs) and dry powder inhalers (DPIs) show similar efficacy and safety 
profiles in COPD. Real-world observational studies have shown that combination 
therapy has significantly greater odds of achieving asthma control when 
delivered via pMDIs. Our aim was to compare effectiveness, in terms of 
moderate/severe COPD exacerbations and long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
prescriptions, for COPD patients initiating fluticasone propionate 
(FP)/salmeterol xinafoate (SAL) via pMDI versus DPI at two doses of FP (500 and 
1,000 μg/d) using a real-life, historical matched cohort study. COPD patients 
with ≥2 years continuous practice data, ≥2 prescriptions for FP/SAL via 
pMDI/DPI, and no prescription for ICS were selected from the Optimum Patient 
Care Research Database. Patients were matched 1:1. Rate of moderate/severe COPD 
exacerbations and odds of LAMA prescription were analyzed using conditional 
Poisson and logistic regression, respectively. Of 472 patients on 500 μg/d, we 
observed fewer moderate/severe exacerbations in patients using pMDI (99 [42%]) 
versus DPI (115 [49%]) (adjusted rate ratio: 0.71; 95% confidence interval: 
0.54, 0.93), an important result since the pMDI is not licensed for COPD in the 
UK, USA, or China. At 1,000 μg/d, we observed lower LAMA prescription for pMDI 
(adjusted odds ratio: 0.71; 95% confidence interval: 0.55, 0.91), but no 
difference in exacerbation rates, potentially due to higher dose of ICS 
overcoming low lung delivery from the DPI.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S141409
PMCID: PMC5566416
PMID: 28860739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure RJ has received personal fees from 
Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer, 
and Nutricia; grants, personal fees, and nonfinancial support from Novartis and 
Astra Zeneca; and personal fees and nonfinancial support from Mundipharma. J 
Martin is a former employee of Observational & Pragmatic Research Institute. VT 
is an employee of Cambridge Research Support. DS is an employee of Optimum 
Patient Care (OPC). J Marshall is an employee of Mundipharma International 
Limited. MSDA is an employee of the Observational & Pragmatic Research Institute 
(OPRI). Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd conducted this 
study, with institutional support from Mundipharma and has conducted paid 
research in respiratory disease on behalf of the following organizations: UK 
National Health Service, British Lung Foundation, Aerocrine, AKL Research and 
Development Ltd, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Meda, Mundipharma, 
Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Respiratory Effectiveness Group, Takeda, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals, Theravance, and Zentiva. DP has board membership with 
Aerocrine, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Mylan, Mundipharma, 
Napp, Novartis, and Teva Pharmaceuticals; consultancy agreements with Almirall, 
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, 
Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Teva Pharmaceuticals, and Theravance; 
grants and unrestricted funding for investigator-initiated studies (conducted 
through Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd) from Aerocrine, 
AKL Research and Development Ltd, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, British 
Lung Foundation, Chiesi, Mylan, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Respiratory 
Effectiveness Group, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Theravance, UK National Health 
Service, Zentiva; payment for lectures/speaking engagements from Almirall, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, GlaxoSmithKline, Kyorin, 
Mylan, Merck, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Skyepharma, and Teva 
Pharmaceuticals; payment for manuscript preparation from Mundipharma and Teva 
Pharmaceuticals; payment for the development of educational materials from 
Mundipharma and Novartis; payment for travel/accommodation/meeting expenses from 
Aerocrine, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, and 
Teva Pharmaceuticals; funding for patient enrollment or completion of research 
from Chiesi, Novartis, Teva Pharmaceuticals, and Zentiva; stock/stock options 
from AKL Research and Development Ltd which produces phytopharmaceuticals; owns 
74% of the social enterprise Optimum Patient Care Ltd (Australia, Singapore, and 
UK) and 74% of Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd 
(Singapore); and is peer reviewer for grant committees of the Efficacy and 
Mechanism Evaluation program, and Health Technology Assessment. Seretide®, 
Accuhaler®, Diskus®, and Evohaler® are registered trademarks of Glaxo Group 
Limited. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


106. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2019 Sep;74(3):255-265. doi: 
10.1097/FJC.0000000000000705.

Correlation of Inhaled Long-Acting Bronchodilators With Adverse Cardiovascular 
Outcomes in Patients With Stable COPD: A Bayesian Network Meta-Analysis of 
Randomized Controlled Trials.

Wu J(1), Ye Y(2), Li C(3), Zhou W(2), Chang R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Qinghai Provincial People's Hospital, Xining, 
China.
(2)Qinghai University Graduate School, Xining, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory, Affiliated Hospital of Qinghai University, Xining, 
China.

A majority of existing studies have focused on the efficacy of inhaled 
long-acting bronchodilators (ILABs), such as long acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMAs) and long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs), and LABAs combined with LAMAs in 
treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The current meta-analysis 
aimed to investigate the correlation of ILABs with specific cardiovascular 
adverse events (CAEs). Five electronic databases, including PubMed, Embase, 
Cochrane Library, Scopus, and Web of Science were systematically retrieved. 
Finally, 16 randomized controlled trials were enrolled into the current 
meta-analysis. Typically, the efficacy of 3 major classes of drugs (LABAs, 
LAMAs, and LABAs combined with LAMAs), and 7 specific drugs (including 
formoterol, glycopyrrolate, indacaterol, olodaterol, Salmeterol, tiotropium, and 
vilanterol) for 4 CAEs, including myocardial infarction, cardiac failure (CF), 
ischemic heart disease (IHD), and stroke in stable COPD patients, was examined. 
All the pooled results were analyzed through the odds ratios (ORs) with the 
corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The direct meta-analysis results 
suggested that LABAs could increase the risk of CF in patients with stable COPD 
compared with placebo controls (OR 1.70, 95% CI, 1.00-2.90). In addition, 
network meta-analysis results indicated that LAMAs combined with LABAs would 
result in an increased risk of CF in patients with stable COPD (OR 2.31, 95% CI, 
1.10-5.09). According to the ILABs specific drug analysis, formoterol may 
potentially have protective effects on IHD compared with placebo controls (OR 
0.45, 95% CI, 0.18-1.00). In conclusion, among these 3 kinds of ILABs, including 
LAMAs, LABAs, and LABAs/LAMAs, for stable COPD patients, LAMAs and LABAs are 
associated with the least possibility to induce myocardial infarction and 
stroke, respectively. However, the application of LABAs will probably increase 
the risk of CF; they should be used with caution for stable COPD patients with 
CF. In addition, in specific-drug analysis, the use of formoterol can reduce the 
risk of treatment-related IHD. Nevertheless, more studies on different drug 
doses are needed in the future to further validate this conclusion.

DOI: 10.1097/FJC.0000000000000705
PMID: 31306366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2017;237:117-129. doi: 10.1007/164_2016_66.

Fixed-Dose Combination Inhalers.

Cazzola M(1), Matera MG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, Respiratory Pharmacology Research Unit, 
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Pharmacology, Second University 
of Naples, Naples, Italy.

In asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), an important step in 
simplifying management and improving adherence with prescribed therapy is to 
reduce the dose frequency to the minimum necessary to maintain disease control. 
Fixed-dose combination (FDC) therapy might enhance compliance by decreasing the 
number of medications and/or the number of daily doses. Furthermore, they have 
the potential for enhancing, sensitizing, and prolonging the effects of 
monocomponents. Combination therapy with an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and a 
long-acting β-agonist (LABA) is considered an important approach for treating 
patients with asthma and patients with severe COPD who have frequent 
exacerbations. Several ICS/LABA FDCs are now commercially available or will 
become available within the next few years for the treatment of COPD and/or 
asthma. Several studies demonstrate that there are a number of added benefits in 
using combinations of beta-agonists and antimuscarinic agents. In particular, 
LABA/long-acting antimuscarinic agent (LAMA) combination seems to play an 
important role in optimizing bronchodilation. Several once-daily and twice-daily 
LABA/LAMA FDCs have been developed or are in clinical development. LAMA/ICS FDCs 
seem to be useful in COPD and mainly in asthma, in patients with severe asthma 
and persistent airflow limitation. The rationale behind the ICS/LABA/LAMA FDCs 
seems logical because all three agents work via different mechanisms on 
different targets, potentially allowing for lower doses of the individual agents 
to be used, accompanied by improved side effect profiles. In effect, in clinical 
practice, concomitant use of all three compounds is common, especially in more 
severe COPD but also in the treatment of adults with poorly controlled asthma 
despite maintenance treatment with high-dose ICS and a LABA.

DOI: 10.1007/164_2016_66
PMID: 27783268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Am J Med. 2018 Jun;131(6):608-622. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.12.018. Epub 2018 
Jan 3.

The Role of Fixed-Dose Dual Bronchodilator Therapy in Treating COPD.

Anzueto A(1), Miravitlles M(2).

Author information:
(1)South Texas Veterans Health Care System, and University of Texas Health 
Science Center, San Antonio, Texas. Electronic address: anzueto@uthscsa.edu.
(2)Department of Pneumology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.

The incidence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is rising in the 
United States, and the disease represents a significant source of morbidity and 
mortality. Primary care providers face many challenges in COPD diagnosis and 
treatment, as different clinical phenotypes require personalized treatment 
approaches. Patient adherence and inhaler technique also contribute to treatment 
outcomes. Around 48% of primary care providers are unaware of guidelines and 
recommendations for COPD diagnosis and treatment, which may lead to misdiagnosis 
or undertreatment of COPD symptoms. Inadequately treated COPD can impair 
patients' quality of life and ability to perform everyday activities. 
Long-acting bronchodilator therapy is the cornerstone treatment for patients 
with COPD; combinations of bronchodilators of different pharmacological classes 
have shown improved efficacy vs monotherapy. We review the rationale behind 
fixed-dose dual bronchodilator therapy, evidence for the 4 currently Food and 
Drug Administration-approved long acting beta agonists 
bronchodilators/long-acting beta-agonists fixed combinations, patient suitability 
for the available inhaler devices, and practical guidance to optimize 
personalized care for patients with COPD.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.12.018
PMID: 29305841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Drugs. 2016 Mar;76(3):343-61. doi: 10.1007/s40265-015-0532-5.

Inhaled Umeclidinium in COPD Patients: A Review and Meta-Analysis.

Pleasants RA(1), Wang T(2), Gao J(3), Tang H(4), Donohue JF(5).

Author information:
(1)Duke University Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, 
Duke University Asthma, Allergy, and Airways Center, 1821 Hillandale Rd Suite 
25A, Durham, NC, 27705, USA. roy.pleasants@duke.edu.
(2)Department of Pharmacy Administration and Clinical Pharmacy, Peking 
University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.
(5)Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, UNC Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

A number of new agents for the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) are at different stages of development, including several inhaled 
long-acting antimuscarinics (LAMA). Long-acting bronchodilators are considered 
to be central to the management of COPD due to the evidence supporting their 
efficacy and safety. Umeclidinium, a LAMA, has recently been approved for the 
maintenance treatment of moderate to very severe COPD in a number of countries. 
This comprehensive review and pooled meta-analysis provides detailed information 
about the efficacy and safety of this agent. The pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics of umeclidinium observed in phase I and II studies support its 
once-daily administration. Umeclidinium is rapidly cleared from blood, and renal 
or hepatic impairment do not lead to significant changes in drug disposition. A 
pooled analysis of phase III and comparative studies of umeclidinium in patients 
with moderate to very severe COPD showed significant improvement in lung 
function measures, including trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), as 
well as in acute exacerbations of COPD, dyspnea, and quality of life. Adverse 
effects, including known anticholinergic effects, were uncommon with 
umeclidinium. Limited data suggest the efficacy of umeclidinium is similar to 
that of tiotropium. Umeclidinium is administered as a dry powder inhaler, 
provides adequate lung delivery in patients with moderate to very severe airflow 
obstruction, and appears to be easily used by patients. Umeclidinium provides a 
safe and effective option as an inhaled LAMA for the management of COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-015-0532-5
PMID: 26755180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Respir Med. 2017 Apr;125:49-56. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.03.001. Epub 2017 Mar 
2.

Symptom variability and control in COPD: Advantages of dual bronchodilation 
therapy.

Di Marco F(1), Santus P(2), Scichilone N(3), Solidoro P(4), Contoli M(5), Braido 
F(6), Corsico AG(7).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Unit, Ospedale San Paolo, Department of Health Science, 
Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Antonio di Rudinì 8, 20142 Milan, Italy.
(2)Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of Biomedical and Clinical 
Sciences, Division of Respiratory Diseases "L. Sacco" Hospital, ASST 
Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Via G.B. Grassi 74, 20157 Milan, Italy.
(3)DIBIMIS, University of Palermo, via Trabucco 180, 90146 Palermo, Italy.
(4)AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, University of Turin, 
Molinette Hospital, Lung Diseases Unit, via Genova 3, 10126 Turin, Italy.
(5)Section of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Medical Sciences, University 
of Ferrara, Via Ludovico Ariosto 35, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(6)Respiratory and Allergy Diseases Clinic, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Genoa, IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, L.go R Benzi 10, 16166 Genoa, 
Italy.
(7)Division of Respiratory Diseases, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, 
Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Pavia, Viale 
Camillo Golgi 19, 27100 Pavia, Italy. Electronic address: corsico@unipv.it.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a heterogeneous 
disorder characterized by usually progressive development of airflow obstruction 
that is not fully reversible. While most patients will experience symptoms 
throughout the day or in the morning upon awakening, many patients do not 
experience their symptoms as constant but report variability in symptoms during 
the course of the day or over time. Symptom variability adversely affects 
patients' health status and increases the risk of COPD exacerbations.
METHODS: We examined data from the literature on symptom variability and control 
in patients with COPD, with focus on the use of inhaled bronchodilator therapy 
with long acting muscarinic antagonist agents (LAMA) plus long-acting 
beta-agonists (LABA); in particular twice-daily fixed-dose combination LAMA/LABA 
therapy with aclidinium/formoterol.
RESULTS: Correct diagnosis and assessment of COPD requires comprehensive 
clinical and functional evaluation and consideration of individual needs to 
support the clinical decisions necessary for effective long-term management. 
Combining bronchodilators from different and complementary pharmacological 
classes with distinct mechanisms of action can increase the magnitude of 
bronchodilation as opposed to increasing the dose of a single bronchodilator.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of inhaled bronchodilator therapy with LAMA/LABA fixed-dose 
combinations in patients with stable COPD is supported by current evidence. This 
treatment approach provides robust effects on lung function and symptom control 
and may improve patients' adherence to treatment. Administration of the 
long-acting bronchodilators aclidinium and formoterol as twice daily fixed-dose 
aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg has the potential to control symptoms throughout 
the 24 h in patients with stable moderate-to-severe COPD.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.03.001
PMID: 28340862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2018 Sep 14;155(37):599-605. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2018.0599.

Medical Treatment of COPD.

Graf J(1), Jörres RA, Lucke T, Nowak D, Vogelmeier CF, Ficker JH.

Author information:
(1)Institute and Outpatient Clinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental 
Medicine, Comprehensive Pneumology Center Munich, German Center for Lung 
Research (DZL), Munich, Germany; Department of Medicine, Pulmonary, Critical 
Care and Sleep Medicine, University Hospitals of Gießen and Marburg, Marburg 
site, German Center for Lung Research (DZL); Department of Respiratory Medicine, 
Allergology and Sleep Medicine, General Hospital Nürnberg, Paracelsus Medical 
University, Nürnberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is common around the 
world and carries a high morbidity and mortality. Symptom- and risk-oriented 
drug treatment is recommended, both in Germany and in other countries. It is not 
yet known to what extent the treatment that is actually delivered in Germany 
corresponds to the current recommendations in the guidelines.
METHODS: As recommended by the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease (GOLD) in 2017, 2281 patients of the national COPD cohort COSYCONET 
(COPD and Systemic Consequences-Comorbidities Network) were classified into Gold 
classes A-D on the basis of disease-specific manifestations and the frequency of 
exacerbations. Moreover, the regular use of medications was documented and 
categorized according to active substance groups. For all groups, the documented 
treatment that was actually given was compared to the recommended treatment.
RESULTS: 67.6% of the patients received a combination of a long-acting 
anticholinergic drug (LAMA) and a long-acting beta-mimetic drug (LABA), while 
65.8% received inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), 11.7% theophylline, and 12.6% oral 
corticosteroids (OCS). Despite recommendations to the contrary, 66% of the 
patients in Groups A and B (low exacerbation rates) were treated with ICS; some 
of these patients carried an additional diagnosis of bronchial asthma. There was 
evidence of undertreatment mainly in groups C and D (high exacerbation rate), 
because many of the patients in these groups were not treated with LAMA or 
LAMA/LABA as recommended.
CONCLUSION: The observed deviations from the recommended treatment, some of 
which were substantial, might lead to suboptimal treatment outcomes as well as 
to avoidable side effects of medication.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2018.0599
PMCID: PMC6206396
PMID: 30282573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Respir Res. 2019 Nov 4;20(1):242. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1213-9.

Single-inhaler triple therapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: a systematic review.

Langham S(1), Lewis J(2), Pooley N(2), Embleton N(2), Langham J(2), Han MK(3), 
Chalmers JD(4).

Author information:
(1)Maverex Limited, Manchester, UK. suelangham@maverex.com.
(2)Maverex Limited, Manchester, UK.
(3)University of Michigan, Women's Respiratory Clinic, Ann Arbor, USA.
(4)University of Dundee and Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK.

BACKGROUND: Guidelines recommend that treatment with a long-acting beta agonist 
(LABA), a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), and inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS), i.e. triple therapy, is reserved for a select group of symptomatic 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who continue to 
exacerbate despite treatment with dual therapy (LABA/LAMA). A number of 
single-inhaler triple therapies are now available and important clinical 
questions remain over their role in the patient pathway. We compared the 
efficacy and safety of single-inhaler triple therapy to assess the magnitude of 
benefit and to identify patients with the best risk-benefit profile for 
treatment. We also evaluated and compared study designs and population 
characteristics to assess the strength of the evidence base.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic search, from inception to December 2018, of 
randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of single-inhaler triple therapy in patients 
with COPD. The primary outcome was the annual rate of moderate and severe 
exacerbations.
RESULTS: We identified 523 records, of which 15 reports/abstracts from six RCTs 
were included. Triple therapy resulted in the reduction of the annual rate of 
moderate or severe exacerbations in the range of 15-52% compared with LAMA/LABA, 
15-35% compared to LABA/ICS and 20% compared to LAMA. The patient-based number 
needed to treat for the moderate or severe exacerbation outcome ranged between 
approximately 25-50 (preventing one patient from having an event) and the 
event-based number needed to treat of around 3-11 (preventing one event). The 
absolute benefit appeared to be greater in patients with higher eosinophil 
counts or historical frequency of exacerbations and ex-smokers. In the largest 
study, there was a significantly higher incidence of pneumonia in the triple 
therapy arm. There were important differences in study designs and populations 
impacting the interpretation of the results and indicating there would be 
significant heterogeneity in cross-trial comparisons.
CONCLUSION: The decision to prescribe triple therapy should consider patient 
phenotype, magnitude of benefit and increased risk of adverse events. Future 
research on specific patient phenotype thresholds that can support treatment and 
funding decisions is now required from well-designed, robust, clinical trials.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: PROSPERO #CRD42018102125 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1213-9
PMCID: PMC6829989
PMID: 31684965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SL, JLe, NP, NE, and JLa report personal fees 
from Boehringer Ingelheim during the conduct of the study and outside the 
submitted work. MKH reports consulting for Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca and Mylan as well as research support from Novartis 
and Sunovion. JDC reports grants and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Grifols and Gilead Sciences outside the submitted 
work. The authors have no financial relationships with any organisations, or 
other relationships or activities, that might have influenced the submitted work 
in the previous three years.


113. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2017 Aug;45:19-33. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.04.002. Epub 
2017 Apr 4.

Role of dual bronchodilators in COPD: A review of the current evidence for 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium.

Ficker JH(1), Rabe KF(2), Welte T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department for Respiratory Medicine, Allergology and Sleep Medicine, 
Nuernberg General Hospital, Nuremberg, Germany; Department for Respiratory 
Medicine, Allergology and Sleep Medicine, Paracelsus Medical University 
Nuernberg, Nuremberg, Germany. Electronic address: ficker@klinikum-nuernberg.de.
(2)Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, and Department of Medicine Christian Albrecht 
University Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Infectious Diseases at Hannover University School 
of Medicine, Hannover, Germany.

In this review, we summarize the rationale for combining long-acting 
bronchodilators in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), and the evidence for the long-acting bronchodilator combination 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY). Clinical practice guidelines generally 
recommend the use of long-acting bronchodilators in the treatment of patients 
with all severities of COPD, either as a first-choice or alternative-choice 
therapy. Combining classes of long-acting bronchodilators can result in superior 
improvements in lung function and clinical outcomes compared with bronchodilator 
monotherapy, as observed in studies of free combinations of long-acting 
beta-agonists (LABAs) and long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs). LABA/LAMA 
fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) can also significantly improve lung function, 
dyspnea, symptoms and health status and reduce exacerbations and rescue 
medication use versus an inhaled corticosteroid/LABA, with a comparable safety 
profile and lower incidence of pneumonia. The LABA/LAMA FDC of IND/GLY is 
approved for use in the management of COPD. This review summarizes the evidence 
for IND/GLY, including its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic profile, and 
published efficacy and safety data from clinical trials in patients with COPD. 
We also explore the unmet needs in COPD and discuss the potential future of COPD 
management.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.04.002
PMID: 28389258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Chest. 2017 Dec;152(6):1296-1305. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.08.013. Epub 2017 
Aug 31.

Tracheobronchopathy From Inhaled Corticosteroids.

Husta BC(1), Raoof S(1), Erzurum S(2), Mehta AC(3).

Author information:
(1)Lenox Hill Hospital, Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, New York, NY.
(2)Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.
(3)Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH. Electronic address: 
mehtaa1@ccf.org.

Erratum in
    Chest. 2019 Jan;155(1):246.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) have become the mainstay of asthma control. They 
are also recommended as an add-on therapy to long acting beta agonists and 
anticholinergics in moderate to severe COPD with recurrent exacerbations. 
Ultimately this clinical practice has led to the widespread use of ICSs, which 
are supported by a more favorable side effect profile than that of systemic 
steroids.

Copyright © 2017 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.08.013
PMCID: PMC6026226
PMID: 28864055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Aug 24;13:2557-2568. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S169958. eCollection 2018.

Dual bronchodilation vs triple therapy in the "real-life" COPD DACCORD study.

Buhl R(1), Criée CP(2), Kardos P(3), Vogelmeier CF(4), Kostikas K(5), Lossi 
NS(6), Worth H(7).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, Mainz, 
roland.buhl@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(2)Department of Sleep and Respiratory Medicine, Evangelical Hospital 
Goettingen-Weende, Bovenden.
(3)Group Practice and Centre for Allergy, Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Red 
Cross Maingau Hospital, Frankfurt am Main.
(4)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-University Marburg, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany.
(5)WorldWide Medical Affairs Respiratory, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(6)Clinical Research, Respiratory, Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nürnberg.
(7)Facharztforum Fürth, Fürth, Germany.

BACKGROUND: No observational studies have evaluated the "real-world" 
effectiveness of dual bronchodilation comprising a long-acting beta-agonist plus a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist vs that of triple therapy (long-acting 
beta-agonist plus long acting muscarinic antagonist plus inhaled corticosteroid) 
in COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DACCORD is a non-interventional, observational clinical 
study that recruited patients following COPD maintenance therapy initiation or 
change in maintenance therapy between or within therapeutic class. Given the 
non-interventional nature of the study, the decision to initiate or change 
medication had to be made by the patients' physicians prior to inclusion in 
DACCORD. We used a matched-pairs analysis to compare disease progression in two 
patient groups: those receiving dual bronchodilation vs those receiving triple 
therapy (each group n=1,046).
RESULTS: In two subgroups of patients matched according to a broad range of 
demographic and disease characteristics, over 1 year, fewer patients receiving 
dual bronchodilation exacerbated than those receiving triple therapy (15.5% vs 
26.6%; P<0.001), with a greater improvement from baseline in COPD Assessment 
Test total score at 1 year (mean±SD -2.9±5.8 vs -1.4±5.5;P<0.001). When analyzed 
according to prior therapy, the highest rate of exacerbations was in patients on 
triple therapy prior to the study who remained on triple therapy. Those changing 
from mono-bronchodilator to dual bronchodilation had the greatest COPD 
Assessment Test total score improvement.
CONCLUSION: In this "real-life" cohort of patients with COPD, most of whom had 
not exacerbated in the 6 months prior to entry, triple therapy did not seem to 
improve outcomes compared with dual bronchodilation in terms of either 
exacerbations or health status. Our analyses clearly demonstrate the potential 
impact of prior medication on study results, something that should be taken into 
account when interpreting the results even of controlled clinical trials.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S169958
PMCID: PMC6113909
PMID: 30197512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr Buhl reports personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Teva, and Cipla, grants and personal fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Novartis, and Roche, and grants from GlaxoSmithKline, all of which 
are outside the submitted work. Dr Criée reports personal fees from Chiesi, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Menarini, and Takeda, all of which are outside 
the submitted work. Dr Kardos reports personal fees from Novartis, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, Menarini, and Takeda, all of which are 
outside the submitted work. Dr Vogelmeier reports personal fees from Almirall, 
Cipla, Berlin Chemie/Menarini, CSL Behring, and Teva, grants and personal fees 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, and Takeda, and grants from the German Federal Ministry 
of Education and Research (BMBF) Competence Network Asthma and COPD (ASCONET), 
Bayer Schering Pharma AG, MSD, and Pfizer, all of which are outside the 
submitted work. Dr Kostikas is employed by, and is a stockholder in Novartis, 
the sponsor of the study. Outside the submitted work, he reports personal fees 
from Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, ELPEN, Novartis, and Takeda. Dr 
Lossi is employed by Novartis, the sponsor of the study. Dr Worth reports 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Klosterfrau, Menarini, Novartis, and Takeda, all of which are outside the 
submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


116. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Jun 6;2016(6):CD008532. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD008532.pub3.

Combination inhaled steroid and long-acting beta₂-agonist in addition to 
tiotropium versus tiotropium or combination alone for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Rojas-Reyes MX(1), García Morales OM, Dennis RJ, Karner C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, 
Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Cr. 7 #40-62, 2nd floor, Bogotá, DC, Colombia.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(3):CD008532.

BACKGROUND: The long-acting bronchodilator tiotropium and single-inhaler 
combination therapy of inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta2-agonists 
(ICS/LABA) are commonly used for maintenance treatment of patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Combining these treatments, which have 
different mechanisms of action, may be more effective than administering the 
individual components.
OBJECTIVES: To assess relative effects of the following treatments on markers of 
exacerbations, symptoms, quality of life and lung function in patients with 
COPD.• Tiotropium plus LABA/ICS versus tiotropium.• Tiotropium plus LABA/ICS 
versus LABA/ICS.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of 
Trials (April 2015), ClinicalTrials.gov (www.ClinicalTrials.gov), the World 
Health Organization (WHO) trials portal and reference lists of relevant 
articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel, randomised controlled trials (RCTs) 
lasting three months or longer conducted to compare ICS and LABA combination 
therapy in addition to inhaled tiotropium versus tiotropium alone or combination 
therapy alone.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We independently assessed trials for inclusion, 
then extracted data on trial quality and outcome results. We contacted study 
authors to ask for additional information. We collected trial information on 
adverse effects.
MAIN RESULTS: Tiotropium plus LABA/ICS versus tiotropiumWe included six studies 
(1902 participants) with low risk of bias that compared tiotropium in addition 
to inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta2-agonist combination therapy 
versus tiotropium alone. Investigators found no statistically significant 
differences in mortality between treatments (odds ratio (OR) 1.80, 95% 
confidence interval (CI) 0.55 to 5.91; two studies; 961 participants), a 
reduction in all-cause hospitalisations with the use of combined therapy 
(tiotropium + LABA/ICS) (OR 0.61, 95% CI 0.40 to 0.92; two studies; 961 
participants; number needed to treat for an additional beneficial outcome (NNTB) 
19.7, 95% CI 10.75 to 123.41). The effect on exacerbations was heterogeneous 
among trials and was not meta-analysed. Health-related quality of life measured 
by St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) showed a statistically 
significant improvement in total scores with use of tiotropium + LABA/ICS 
compared with tiotropium alone (mean difference (MD) -3.46, 95% CI -5.05 to 
-1.87; four studies; 1446 participants). Lung function was significantly 
different in the combined therapy (tiotropium + LABA/ICS) group, although 
average benefit with this therapy was small. None of the included studies 
included exercise tolerance as an outcome.A pooled estimate of these studies did 
not show a statistically significant difference in adverse events (OR 1.16, 95% 
CI 0.92 to 1.47; four studies; 1363 participants), serious adverse events (OR 
0.86, 95% CI 0.57 to 1.30; four studies; 1758 participants) and pneumonia (Peto 
OR 1.62, 95% CI 0.54 to 4.82; four studies; 1758 participants). Tiotropium plus 
LABA/ICS versus LABA/ICSOne of the six studies (60 participants) also compared 
combined therapy (tiotropium + LABA/ICS) versus LABA/ICS therapy alone. This 
study was affected by lack of power; therefore results did not allow us to draw 
conclusions for this comparison.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: In this update, we found new moderate-quality evidence 
that combined tiotropium + LABA/ICS therapy compared with tiotropium plus 
placebo decreases hospital admission. Low-quality evidence suggests an 
improvement in disease-specific quality of life with combined therapy. However, 
evidence is insufficient to support the benefit of tiotropium + LABA/ICS for 
mortality and exacerbations (moderate- and low-quality evidence, respectively). 
Of note, not all participants enrolled in the included studies would be 
candidates for triple therapy according to current international 
guidance.Compared with the use of tiotropium plus placebo, tiotropium + 
LABA/ICS-based therapy does not increase undesirable effects such as adverse 
events or serious non-fatal adverse events.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008532.pub3
PMCID: PMC6481546
PMID: 27271056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. OM Garcia has received financial support to 
attend scientific meetings from pharmaceutical companies which manufacture 
tiotropium preparations. The remaining three authors were not aware of any 
conflict of interest that should be declared covering the past three years.


117. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jun 23;12:1877-1882. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S138006. eCollection 2017.

Maintenance therapy in COPD: time to phase out ICS and switch to the new 
LAMA/LABA inhalers?

Tariq SM(1), Thomas EC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Luton and Dunstable University Hospital, 
Luton.
(2)Respiratory Unit, Bedford Hospital, Bedford, UK.

Long-term maintenance therapy for COPD is evolving rapidly. Dual bronchodilation 
with new long acting muscarinic antagonist and long-acting beta-agonist 
(LAMA/LABA) fixed dose combination inhalers were introduced over the past 2 
years. In clinical trials, these inhalers significantly improved lung function 
(trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second), patient-reported outcomes, and 
quality of life measures compared with placebo, their respective monocomponents, 
and tiotropium. The recorded adverse events of these new inhalers were also 
similar to those of their monocomponents or placebo. There are concerns 
regarding long-term complications (weight gain, osteoporosis, cataract) and 
increased risk of community-acquired pneumonia with the use of inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS). The new LAMA/LABA inhalers could potentially reduce the 
use of ICS as part and parcel of maintenance therapy in COPD. Recent studies 
compared these LAMA/LABA inhalers with ICS/LABA combination inhalers in 
moderate-to-severe COPD. The results are promising and favor the LAMA/LABA 
inhalers, especially in the longer duration trials. Furthermore, there is a 
clearer picture emerging as to the subgroup of COPD patients who may be able to 
successfully switch from their current ICS/LABA therapy to these new LAMA/LABA 
inhalers.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S138006
PMCID: PMC5491575
PMID: 28694698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflict of 
interest in this work.


118. Drugs. 2016 Jan;76(1):135-46. doi: 10.1007/s40265-015-0527-2.

Tiotropium/Olodaterol: A Review in COPD.

Dhillon S(1).

Author information:
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay 0754, Auckland, New Zealand. 
demail@springer.com.

Tiotropium/olodaterol (Stiolto™ Respimat®, Spiolto™ Respimat®) is a fixed-dose 
combination of the long-acting antimuscarinic agent tiotropium bromide 
(hereafter referred to as tiotropium) and the long-acting beta-adrenoreceptor 
agonist olodaterol delivered via the Respimat® Soft Mist™ inhaler. It is 
indicated for the maintenance treatment of airflow obstruction in adults with 
COPD. Several randomized, phase III studies of 6-52 weeks' duration evaluated 
the efficacy of once-daily tiotropium/olodaterol in patients with GOLD stage 2-3 
or 2-4 COPD. Tiotropium/olodaterol maintenance therapy improved lung function to 
a greater extent than the individual components or placebo and provided 
clinically meaningful improvements in health-related quality of life and 
dyspnoea in 12- and 52-week studies. Tiotropium/olodaterol consistently improved 
24-h lung function in 6-week studies, providing greater benefits than the 
monotherapies, placebo or twice-daily fixed-dose fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol. Inspiratory capacity and exercise endurance were also 
improved with tiotropium/olodaterol following 6 or 12 weeks' treatment. The 
tolerability profile of tiotropium/olodaterol in the phase III studies was 
generally similar to that of the component monotherapies. The most common 
adverse events and serious adverse events during 52 weeks' therapy were 
respiratory in nature, with COPD exacerbation, unsurprisingly, reported most 
frequently with tiotropium/olodaterol and component monotherapies. Although 
additional data assessing the effect of tiotropium/olodaterol on exacerbations 
and comparative studies with other recommended therapies are needed to 
definitively position tiotropium/olodaterol, current evidence indicates that 
tiotropium/olodaterol is a useful treatment option for patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-015-0527-2
PMID: 26683033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2017 Jan;23(1):103-108. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000344.

Anticholinergic drugs in asthma therapy.

D'Amato M(1), Vitale C, Molino A, Lanza M, D'Amato G.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Pneumology, 'Federico II University', AO 'Dei Colli' Monaldi 
Hospital bRespiratory Department, University of Naples Federico II cDivision of 
Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Department of Respiratory Diseases, High 
Specialty Hospital 'A. Cardarelli' dUniversity of Naples Federico II, School of 
Specialization in Respiratory Diseases, Naples, Italy.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Current guidelines recommend a stepwise approach for 
pharmacological therapy aimed to achieve and maintain asthma control. Despite 
these recommendations, at least 50% of patients continue to be uncontrolled with 
risk of asthma exacerbations that can often be serious and are associated with 
deterioration of quality of life. In recent years, the interest in 
anticholinergic bronchodilators, which have been primarily used in the treatment 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, has increased patients with 
uncontrolled asthma. This review analyzes the mechanisms for the proposed 
clinical use of anticholinergic bronchodilators as an adjunctive therapy in 
asthma.
RECENT FINDINGS: Based on existing and recent evidence, the use of 
anticholinergic bronchodilators, particularly long acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMAs), plays an important role as add-on therapy in patients uncontrolled on 
existing therapies. In particular, the use of anticholinergics in asthma may 
have a role in patients intolerant to long-acting beta agonist, in patients with 
certain pharmacogenetic profiles and in those patients with asthma symptoms 
mostly at night.
SUMMARY: Data from clinical trials and from real-life confirm the safety and 
efficacy of LAMAs, especially tiotropium, in patients who remain uncontrolled 
despite the use of inhaled corticosteroid therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000344
PMID: 27820743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Jun;32:53-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.04.002. Epub 
2015 May 6.

The 24-h lung-function profile of once-daily tiotropium and olodaterol 
fixed-dose combination in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Beeh KM(1), Westerman J(2), Kirsten AM(3), Hébert J(4), Grönke L(5), Hamilton 
A(6), Tetzlaff K(7), Derom E(8).

Author information:
(1)Insaf GmbH Institut für Atemwegsforschung, Wiesbaden, Germany. Electronic 
address: k.beeh@insaf-wi.de.
(2)Pulmonary and Sleep Associates of Jasper, Jasper, AL, USA.
(3)Pulmonary Research Institute at LungClinic Grosshansdorf GmbH, Airway 
Research Center North, Grosshansdorf, Germany.
(4)Centre de Recherche Appliquée en Allergie de Québec, Québec, Canada.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(6)Boehringer Ingelheim, Burlington, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany; Department of 
Sports Medicine, Medical Clinic V, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(8)Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: This study investigated the effects on 24-h lung function and lung 
volume of a once-daily fixed-dose combination (FDC) of the long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist tiotropium and the long-acting beta-agonist olodaterol in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: This was a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, Phase III 
trial with an incomplete crossover design. Patients received four of the 
following six treatment options for 6 weeks each: placebo, olodaterol 5 μg, 
tiotropium 2.5 μg, tiotropium 5 μg, tiotropium + olodaterol FDC 2.5/5 μg and 
tiotropium + olodaterol FDC 5/5 μg, all delivered via the Respimat(®) inhaler. 
The primary end point was forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) area under the 
curve from 0 to 24 h (AUC0-24) response after 6 weeks of treatment; key 
secondary end points were FEV1 AUC from 0 to 12 h and AUC from 12 to 24 h, and 
further end points included lung-volume parameters measured using body 
plethysmography (subset of patients), measures of peak and trough FEV1, and 
incidence of adverse events.
RESULTS: A significant improvement in FEV1 AUC0-24 response was observed with 
tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 μg and 2.5/5 μg versus placebo and monotherapies 
after 6 weeks of treatment; mean response with tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 μg 
versus placebo was 0.280 L (p < 0.0001). Differences to monotherapies with 
tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 μg were 0.115 L versus olodaterol 5 μg, 0.127 L 
versus tiotropium 2.5 μg and 0.110 L versus tiotropium 5 μg (p < 0.0001 for all 
comparisons). Secondary end points supported these data. No safety concerns were 
identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study demonstrated improvements in lung function over 
24 h with an FDC of tiotropium + olodaterol over tiotropium or olodaterol alone, 
with no observed difference in tolerability. ClinicalTrials.gov number: 
NCT01559116.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.04.002
PMID: 25956072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2018 Jun;12(6):447-459. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2018.1476853. Epub 2018 May 28.

An overview of glycopyrrolate/eFlow® CS in COPD.

Kerwin E(1), Ferguson GT(2).

Author information:
(1)a Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Inc ., Medford , OR , USA.
(2)b Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan , Farmington Hills , MI 
, USA.

Erratum in
    Expert Rev Respir Med. 2018 Aug;12(8):719.

COPD is highly prevalent in the US and globally, requiring new treatment 
strategies due to the high disease burden and increase in the aging population. 
Here, we profile the newly FDA-approved LONHALA MAGNAIR (glycopyrrolate 
[GLY]/eFlow® Closed System [CS]; 25 mcg twice daily), a nebulized long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) for the long-term maintenance treatment of COPD, 
including chronic bronchitis and/or emphysema. Areas covered: An overview of 
COPD and treatment landscape, focusing on GLY/eFlow CS, reviewing the published 
literature pertinent to the drug/device combination is reported. Expert 
commentary: GLY/eFlow CS consists of glycopyrrolate delivered via a novel 
electronic nebulizer and is the first nebulized LAMA to be approved by the FDA. 
GLY/eFlow CS has been studied in an extensive clinical development program, 
including phase II dose-ranging studies, two 12-week phase III studies 
demonstrating statistically significant and clinically important improvements in 
pulmonary function and patient-reported outcomes with a well-tolerated safety 
profile, and a 48-week phase III study highlighting the long-term safety of 
GLY/eFlow CS, along with long-term improvements in lung function and 
patient-reported outcomes. Additional studies are required to assess the impact 
of GLY/eFlow CS on COPD exacerbations, identify alternative uses of the eFlow CS 
nebulizer, and direct comparisons to other LAMAs.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2018.1476853
PMID: 29774778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Dec 19;12:27-33. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S121687. eCollection 2017.

Trend of cost and utilization of COPD medication in Korea.

Lee J(1), Lee JH(1), Kim JA(2), Rhee CK(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Seoul St Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul.
(2)Pharmaceutical Policy Evaluation Research Team, Research Institution, Health 
Insurance Review and Assessment Service, Wonju-si, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: There are only a few longitudinal studies regarding medical 
utilization and costs for patients with COPD. The purpose of this study was to 
analyze the trend of medical utilization and costs on a long-term basis.
METHODS: Using the Korean Health Insurance Review and Assessment Service (HIRA) 
data from 2008 to 2013, COPD patients were identified. The trend of medical 
utilization and costs was also analyzed.
RESULTS: The number of COPD patients increased by 13.9% from 2008 to 2013. 
During the same period, the cost of COPD medication increased by 78.2%. 
Methylxanthine and systemic beta agonists were most widely prescribed between 
2008 and 2013. However, inhaled medications such as long-acting beta-2 agonist 
(LABA), long acting muscarinic agonist, and inhaled corticosteroid plus LABA 
were dispensed to a relatively low proportion of patients with COPD. The number 
of patients who were prescribed inhaled medications increased gradually from 
2008 to 2013, while the number of patients prescribed systemic beta agonist and 
methylxanthine has decreased since 2010.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that there is a large gap between the COPD 
guidelines and clinical practice in Korea. Training programs for primary care 
physicians on diagnosis and guideline-based treatment are needed to improve the 
management of COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S121687
PMCID: PMC5182037
PMID: 28031708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CKR received consulting/lecture fees from MSD, 
Astra-Zeneca, Novartis, GSK, Takeda, Mundipharma, Sandoz, Boehringer-Ingelheim, 
and Teva-Handok. The other authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.


123. Adv Ther. 2017 Feb;34(2):281-299. doi: 10.1007/s12325-016-0459-6. Epub 2016 Dec 
15.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Individualized Therapy: Tailored Approach 
to Symptom Management.

Singh D(1), Miravitlles M(2), Vogelmeier C(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(2)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), University Medical Center Giessen and 
Marburg, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Adv Ther. 2017 Mar;34(3):771.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with high morbidity 
and mortality. COPD is typified by persistent, progressive airflow limitation 
and a range of respiratory and systemic symptoms such as breathlessness, 
coughing, wheezing, depression, anxiety, general fatigue, and sleeping 
difficulties. Despite receiving treatment for COPD, many patients suffer from 
regular symptoms that affect their daily lives and lead to increased morbidity. 
These symptoms vary in severity, frequency, and type, and can occur at any time 
throughout the 24-h day, with over half of patients with COPD experiencing 
symptoms in the morning, during the day, and at nighttime. Despite the 
prevalence of symptoms, patient and physician perception of the impact of COPD 
symptoms on patients' lives is not always in concordance. Dual bronchodilator 
therapy with a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and long-acting beta 
agonist (LABA) has the potential to treat the symptoms of COPD in addition to 
improving lung function. This review therefore examines the burden of symptoms 
experienced throughout the day by patients with COPD and the evidence for 
combined LAMA/LABA treatment in terms of symptom management. As patients with 
COPD experience varying symptoms throughout the course of their disease, the 
role of tailoring treatment to the individual needs of the patient is also 
examined. We conclude that the symptoms of COPD are troublesome, variable, can 
occur during all parts of the 24-h day, and have a substantial impact on 
patients' health status and quality of life. In order to provide effective, 
patient-orientated care, patients with COPD should be evaluated on the basis of 
lung function, the frequency of symptoms, and patient-perceived impact of 
symptoms on their lives. Therapy should be chosen carefully based on 
individualized assessment, ensuring personalization to the individual needs of 
the patient.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-016-0459-6
PMCID: PMC5331083
PMID: 27981495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2018 Nov-Dec;6(6):1927-1935.e3. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2018.01.035. Epub 2018 Feb 10.

Use of ICS/LABA Combinations or LAMA Is Associated with a Lower Risk of Acute 
Exacerbation in Patients with Coexistent COPD and Asthma.

Su VY(1), Yang KY(2), Yang YH(3), Tsai YH(4), Perng DW(5), Su WJ(5), Chou KT(6), 
Su KC(5), Yen YF(7), Chen PC(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: kyyang@vghtpe.gov.tw.
(3)Health Information and Epidemiology Laboratory, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Chiayi, Taiwan; Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan; School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Institute of Occupational Medicine and Industrial 
Hygiene, National Taiwan University College of Public Health, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Respiratory 
Care, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan; Department of Respiratory 
Therapy, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(8)Institute of Occupational Medicine and Industrial Hygiene, National Taiwan 
University College of Public Health, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Environmental 
and Occupational Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Based on current guidelines, more research is urgently needed to 
guide appropriate treatment for patients with asthma-chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to investigate medication effects on 
acute exacerbation in patients with coexistent COPD and asthma.
METHODS: Using Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database, we 
conducted a nationwide population-based study to evaluate medication effects in 
patients with COPD and asthma. Patients diagnosed with both asthma and COPD 
between 1997 and 2012 were enrolled as the COPD + asthma cohort. The primary 
endpoint was acute exacerbation. The definitions of COPD and asthma were 
validated. The validation study confirmed the accuracy of definitions of COPD 
(86.2% sensitivity) and asthma (92.0% sensitivity).
RESULTS: The study included 251,398 patients with COPD + asthma and 514,522 
patients with COPD alone, with a mean follow-up period of 9.85 years. After 
adjustment, hazard ratios (HRs) for long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and 
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist (ICS/LABA) combinations were lower 
(time-dependent model, 1 year: LAMA, HR 0.51, 95% confidence interval [CI] 
0.49-0.54; ICS/LABA combinations, HR 0.61, 95% CI 0.60-0.62; all P < .0001) than 
were those for LABAs or ICSs in patients with COPD and asthma.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of LAMA or ICS/LABA combinations was associated with a 
lower risk of acute exacerbation in patients with COPD and asthma in this study.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2018.01.035
PMID: 29432960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2017 Dec;18(17):1833-1843. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2017.1403583. Epub 2017 Nov 15.

A review of current and developing fixed-dose LABA/LAMA combinations for 
treating COPD.

Lal C(1), Strange C(1).

Author information:
(1)a Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine , Medical University 
of South Carolina , Charleston , SC , USA.

The current GOLD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease) 
recommendations suggest using long acting beta agonists (LABA) and long acting 
muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) in combination for group B COPD patients with 
persistent symptoms, group C COPD patients with further exacerbations on LAMA 
therapy alone and for group D COPD patients with or without combination with 
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). Thus, there is a lot of interest in developing 
LABA/LAMA combinations for maintenance therapy of chronic stable COPD. Areas 
covered: Many LABA/LAMA combinations have successfully been approved through 
carefully designed pivotal clinical trials. The current clinical use of 
LABA/LAMA combinations in COPD will continue to evolve as new trials with and 
without inhaled corticosteroids are completed. Expert opinion: Combining 
different classes of bronchodilators in a single inhaler is an attractive 
concept that can potentially improve patient adherence to therapy. Because 
LABA/LAMA combinations are the preferred treatment option for preventing COPD 
exacerbations in the updated GOLD guidelines for COPD, they will be clinically 
used. Future treatment of COPD should revolve around a personalized approach 
based on characterization of the COPD phenotype.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2017.1403583
PMID: 29115881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Rev Mal Respir. 2017 May;34(5):535-543. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2017.02.006. Epub 
2017 May 31.

[Changing patterns of medication prescription for COPD patients in France. 
Impact of long acting muscarinic antagonists' availability].

[Article in French]

Jébrak G(1), Burgel PR(2), Caillaud D(3), Deslée G(4), Brinchault G(5), Chanez 
P(6), Court-Fortune I(7), Escamilla R(8), Nesme-Meyer P(9), Pinet C(10), Perez 
T(11), Paillasseur JL(12), Roche N(2); pour le groupe Initiatives BPCO.

Author information:
(1)Service de pneumologie, hôpital Bichat, Assistance publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, 75018 Paris, France. Electronic address: gilles.jebrak@bch.aphp.fr.
(2)Service de pneumologie, hôpital Cochin, Assistance publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, université Paris Descartes (EA2511), Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75005 Paris, 
France.
(3)Service de pneumologie, hôpital Gabriel-Montpied, CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, 
63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(4)Service de pneumologie, hôpital Maison Blanche, CHU de Reims, 51000 Reims, 
France.
(5)Service de pneumologie, hôpital Pontchaillou, 35000 Rennes, France.
(6)Département des maladies respiratoires, Assistance publique-Hôpitaux de 
Marseille, Aix Marseille Université, 13000 Marseille, France.
(7)Service de pneumologie, centre hospitalier universitaire de Saint-Étienne, 
42270 Saint-Priest-en-Jarez, France.
(8)Clinique des voies respiratoires, hôpital Larrey, 31400 Toulouse, France.
(9)Service de pneumologie, hôpital de la Croix Rousse, 69004 Lyon, France.
(10)Polyclinique Les Fleurs, 83190 Ollioules, France.
(11)Service de pneumologie, hôpital Albert-Calmette, 59000 Lille, France.
(12)EFFI-STAT, 75001 Paris, France.

INTRODUCTION: We studied the pattern changes over time of medication 
prescriptions for COPD and their conformity with French and international 
recommendations using data from patients in the prospective French cohort 
"Initiatives BPCO".
METHOD: Eight hundred and forty-six patients have been included during a first 
period from August, 2001 till May 2006 (n=425) and a second period from June, 
2006 till June, 2012 (n=421). The pivotal date was based on the tiotropium 
availability in France.
RESULTS: During period 1, we recruited older patients (average 65 vs 64 years), 
less often women (19 vs 26 %) and having less severe airflow obstruction (mean 
FEV1 48 vs 54 %). The ICS prescriptions decreased in mild COPD, but there was no 
change for inhaled long-acting beta-2 agonist (LABA) (68 %). The use of 
LABA+LAMA association without ICS increased from 0.9 to 7 %, but remained lower 
than the fixed LABA+ICS association (26 %), less often prescribed than the 
triple association LABA+ICS+LAMA (32.5 % in period 2). The use of long-acting 
bronchodilators increased from 68 to 80 % between both periods. Vaccinations and 
rehabilitation remained insufficiently prescribed. LAMA had been added but did 
not appear to replace other drugs.

Copyright © 2017 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2017.02.006
PMID: 28578989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Feb 10;11:289-93. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S96948. eCollection 2016.

Relevance of dosage in adherence to treatment with long acting beta agonistss 
in patients with COPD.

Izquierdo JL(1), Paredero JM(2), Piedra R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pneumology, Hospital Universitario de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Guadalajara Integrated Care Management, Guadalajara, 
Spain.
(3)Department of Primary Care, Guadalajara Integrated Care Management, 
Guadalajara, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to assess the degree of adherence for 
two standard regimens for administrating anticholinergic drugs (12 and 24 hours) 
in patients with chronic obstruction of the airflow and to establish whether the 
use of a once-daily dose improves the level of treatment adherence.
METHODS: We used long acting beta agonistss (LAMAs) as a study variable, and 
included the entire health area of Castile-La Mancha, numbering 2,100,998 
inhabitants, as the study population. We analyzed a total of 16,446 patients who 
had been prescribed a LAMA between January 1, 2013 and December 31, 2013. The 
follow-up period, based on a centralized system of electronic prescription 
management, was extended until December 2014.
RESULTS: During 2013, the medication collected was 7.4%-10.7% higher than 
indicated by labeling. This was very similar for all LAMAs, irrespective of the 
patient's sex, the molecule, the device, and the drug dosage. We did not observe 
seasonal variations in the consumption of LAMAs, nor did we detect differences 
between prescription drugs for once-daily (every 24 hours) versus twice-daily 
(every 12 hours) administration, between the different molecules, or between 
different types of inhalers for the same molecule. The results were similar in 
2014.
CONCLUSION: The principal conclusion of this study is that, in an area with a 
centralized management system of pharmacological prescriptions, adherence to 
treatment with LAMAs is very high, irrespective of the molecules or inhalation 
device. We did not find that patients who used twice-daily medication had a 
lower adherence.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S96948
PMCID: PMC4755690
PMID: 26929614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Jun;9(3):84-96. doi: 10.1177/1753465815576471. Epub 
2015 Mar 22.

long acting muscarinic antagonists for the prevention of exacerbations of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Jones PW(1).

Author information:
(1)St George's, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK 
pjones@sgul.ac.uk.

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have important 
consequences for lung function, health status and mortality. Furthermore, they 
are associated with high economic costs, predominantly related to 
hospitalization. They are managed acutely with short-acting bronchodilators, 
systemic corticosteroids or antibiotics; however, a large proportion of COPD 
exacerbations are unreported and therefore untreated or self-managed. There is 
evidence to suggest that these unreported exacerbations also have important 
consequences for health status; therefore, reducing exacerbation risk is an 
important goal in the management of COPD. Current guidelines recommend 
long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) as first-line bronchodilator therapy 
in patients with stable COPD who have a high risk of exacerbation or increased 
symptoms. To date, three LAMAs, tiotropium bromide, aclidinium bromide and 
glycopyrronium bromide, have been approved as maintenance bronchodilator 
treatments for stable COPD. These all provide clinically significant 
improvements in lung function, reduce symptoms and improve health status 
compared with placebo in patients with COPD. This paper reviews evidence from 
randomized, controlled clinical trials demonstrating that tiotropium, aclidinium 
and glycopyrronium reduce exacerbation risk in patients with COPD. Reductions 
were seen irrespective of the exacerbation measure used, whether time to first 
event or annualized exacerbation rate. Furthermore, studies with aclidinium 
suggest LAMAs can reduce exacerbation risk irrespective of whether exacerbation 
events are assessed, using an event-based approach or a symptom-based method 
which includes unreported events. Together these results demonstrate that LAMAs 
have the potential to provide clinical benefit in the management of 
exacerbations in patients with stable COPD.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815576471
PMID: 25801643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 4;14:353-360. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S176662. eCollection 2019.

Early management of COPD: where are we now and where do we go from here? A 
Delphi consensus project.

Di Marco F(1), Balbo P(2), de Blasio F(3), Cardaci V(4), Crimi N(5), Girbino 
G(6), Pelaia G(7), Pirina P(8), Roversi P(9), Santus P(10)(11), Scichilone 
N(12), Vatrella A(13), Pasqualetti P(14), Carone M(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Respiratory Unit, Papa 
Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy, fabiano.dimarco@unimi.it.
(2)SC Malattie dell'Apparato Respiratorio, AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, 
Italy.
(3)Respiratory Medicine and Pulmonary Rehabilitation Section, Clinic Center 
S.p.A. Private Hospital, Department of Medicine and Health Sciences "V Tiberio", 
University of Molise, Campobasso, Italy.
(4)Unit of Pulmonary Rehabilitation, IRCCS "San Raffaele Pisana", Rome, Italy.
(5)Unità Operativa Complessa di Pneumologia e Allergologia, Policlinico Rodolico 
Vittorio Emanuele, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy.
(6)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Odontoiatriche e delle Immagini 
Morfologiche e Funzionali (BIOMORF), Università degli Studi di Messina, Messina, 
Italy.
(7)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Unit of Respiratory Diseases, 
University Magna Graecia of Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.
(8)Respiratory Unit, AOU Sassari, Sassari, Italy.
(9)Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, Policlinico di Modena, Modena, Italy.
(10)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.
(11)Division of Respiratory Diseases "L. Sacco" Hospital, ASST Fatebenefratelli 
Sacco, Milan, Italy.
(12)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica (DIBIMIS), 
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(13)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry "Scuola Medica Salernitana", 
University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.
(14)Fondazione Fatebenefratelli per la Ricerca e la Formazione Sanitaria e 
Sociale, Rome, Italy.
(15)Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri, IRCCS di Cassano delle Murge, Cassano 
delle Murge (BA), Italy.

PURPOSE: There is a lack of consensus on the most appropriate early diagnostic 
strategy, criteria for early access to treatment and follow-up approach for 
patients with COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A Delphi consensus project investigated the early 
management of COPD. We formulated two questionnaires for completion by 
pneumologists in Italy.
RESULTS: A total of 207 specialists completed questionnaire 1 and 184 of them 
questionnaire 2, between November 2016 and October 2017. Early diagnosis of COPD 
was considered uncommon for 93.2% of the expert panel. Regardless of the 
definition of "early diagnosis" - a diagnosis made before the clinical 
manifestation of the disease for most responders (60.4%) - experts were 
confident of the positive effects of early disease management, which they 
consider is effective in modifying the natural history of the disease. Lack of 
awareness of the disease was considered the first limiting factor to early COPD 
management for 78% of respondents. The most effective steps to reduce functional 
decline were considered to be smoking cessation, followed by long-acting 
beta-agonist (LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), LAMA, LABA, and 
finally inhaled corticosteroid/LABA (P<0.01 for each paired comparison). 
Specialists considered it "inappropriate" for general practitioners to perform 
both the early diagnosis and therapy of COPD without the involvement of a 
specialist.
CONCLUSION: Early management of COPD is uncommon, and although data on the 
effects of early disease management on long-term outcomes are limited, Italian 
experts are confident of the clinical efficacy of this approach.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S176662
PMCID: PMC6366359
PMID: 30787604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr. Di Marco has received honoraria 
for lectures at national and international meetings from Almirall, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Dompe, Guidotti/Malesci, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini, Novartis, and Zambon. He has served as a consultant 
for AstraZeneca, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Novartis, and Zambon. He has received 
financial support for research from Novartis and Boehringer Ingelheim. Prof. Dr. 
de Blasio has served as a consultant for AstraZeneca, and Dr. Santus has served 
as a consultant for AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Zambon Italia, Guiodotti, 
GSK, and Chiesi Farmaceutici. The authors report no other conflicts of interest 
in this work.


130. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2016 May;25(5):578-89. doi: 10.1002/pds.3961. Epub 
2016 Jan 29.

One-year mortality associated with COPD treatment: a comparison of tiotropium 
and long-acting beta2-agonists in three Italian regions: results from the OUTPUL 
study.

Kirchmayer U(1), Cascini S(1), Agabiti N(1), Di Martino M(1), Bauleo L(1), 
Formoso G(2), Voci C(2), Pistelli R(3), Patorno E(4), Davoli M(1); OUTPUL study 
group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Lazio Regional Health Service, Rome, Italy.
(2)Emilia-Romagna Regional Health and Social Care Agency, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Respiratory Physiology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy.
(4)Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

PURPOSE: Long-acting bronchodilators, i.e. beta-2-agonists (LABA) and tiotropium 
are commonly used in COPD treatment. Choice of a specific agent is based on 
effectiveness and safety. Evidence yields controversial results with respect to 
mortality. The present study compared one-year mortality associated to treatment 
with tiotropium versus LABA.
METHODS: A population-based cohort study using data from Italian health 
information systems was performed. Patients aged 45+ years, discharged with COPD 
diagnosis in 2006-2009 were identified. Through record linkage with drug claims, 
patients who received a first prescription of LABA or tiotropium within 6 months 
after discharge were enrolled. The main analysis was restricted to naïve users 
(no prior use of either LABA or tiotropium). We used 'intention to treat' (ITT) 
and 'as treated' (AT) approaches. We followed patients for a maximum of 
12 months. Hazard ratios (HRs) were calculated by Cox regression including 
quintiles of propensity score. In sensitivity analysis patients receiving 
tiotropium + LABA combination were included in the tiotropium group.
RESULTS: Among the 33 891 enrolees, 28% were exposed to Tio, 56% to LABA, 16% to 
both. Overall mean age was 74 years and the mortality rate was 122/1000 
person-years (py) at the ITT analysis and 108/1000 py at the AT analysis. The 
adjusted HR for tiotropium only compared with LABA only was 1.06 (95%CI: 
0.94-1.20) at the ITT analysis and 1.00 (95%CI: 0.93-1.08) at the AT analysis. 
Results were robust in sensitivity analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: In this real-world study use of tiotropium was not associated with 
an increased risk of one-year mortality compared with LABA. © 2016 The Authors. 
Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

© 2016 The Authors. Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety published by John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.3961
PMCID: PMC5066679
PMID: 26822968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. COPD. 2017 Dec;14(6):641-647. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2017.1385056. Epub 2017 Nov 
8.

Use of ICS in COPD: From Blockbuster Medicine to Precision Medicine.

Contoli M(1), Corsico AG(2), Santus P(3)(4)(5), Di Marco F(6)(7), Braido F(8), 
Rogliani P(9), Calzetta L(9), Scichilone N(10).

Author information:
(1)a Section of Respiratory Internal and Cardio-Respiratory Diseases, Department 
of Medical Sciences , University of Ferrara , Ferrara , Italy.
(2)b Division of Respiratory Diseases, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 
Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics , University of Pavia , Pavia , 
Italy.
(3)c Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (DIBIC) , University of 
Milan , Milan , Italy.
(4)d Division of Respiratory Diseases , "Luigi Sacco" University Hospital , 
Milan , Italy.
(5)e ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco , Milan , Italy.
(6)f Respiratory Unit, ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, Ospedale San Paolo , Milan , 
Italy.
(7)g Department of Health Science , Università degli Studi di Milano , Milan , 
Italy.
(8)h Respiratory and Allergy Department , University of Genoa, Ospedale 
Policlinico San Martino , Genoa , Italy.
(9)i Department of Systems Medicine , University of Rome Tor Vergata , Rome , 
Italy.
(10)j Department of Biomedicine and DIBIMIS , University of Palermo , Palermo , 
Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of mortality 
worldwide, whose burden is expected to increase in the next decades, because of 
numerous risk factors, including the aging of the population. COPD is both 
preventable and treatable by an effective management including risk factor 
reduction, prevention, assessment, and treatment of acute exacerbations and 
co-morbidities. The available agents approved for COPD treatment are long-acting 
or ultra-long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) and long acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMAs) bronchodilators, as well as inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in combination 
with LABAs. ICS use has been restricted only to selected COPD patients by the 
most recent documents, mainly based on the risk of exacerbations. However, 
several observational studies showed a high rate of prescription of ICS in COPD, 
irrespective of clinical recommendations, questioning the efficacy of these 
compounds in unselected patients with COPD and leading to possible increase risk 
of side effects related to ICS use. After examining the low levels of adherence 
in primary care and in the clinical settings to national and international 
recommendations for the treatment of COPD in different countries, the most 
common drivers of the prevailing use of ICS are critically reviewed here by 
examining their pros and cons, aimed at identifying evidence-based drivers for a 
proper selection of patients who may benefit from the proper use of ICS.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2017.1385056
PMID: 29116901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 18;14:249-260. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S185485. eCollection 2019.

Real-life effectiveness of indacaterol-glycopyrronium after switching from 
tiotropium or salmeterol/fluticasone therapy in patients with symptomatic COPD: 
the POWER study.

Kaplan A(1), Chapman KR(2), Anees SM(3), Mayers I(4), Rochdi D(5), Djandji M(5), 
Préfontaine D(5), McIvor A(6).

Author information:
(1)Family Physician Airways Group of Canada, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada, for4kids@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry - Western University, University of 
Windsor, ON, Canada.
(4)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc., Montreal, QC, Canada.
(6)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Firestone Institute for 
Respiratory Health, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

PURPOSE: In contrast to randomized controlled trials (RCTs), changes in 
maintenance pharmacotherapy in clinical practice occur without a washout period. 
The Prospective cohort study for the real-life effectiveness evaluation of 
glycOpyrronium With indacatERol combination in the management of COPD in Canada 
(POWER) study evaluated the real-life effectiveness of 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) following a direct switch from a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA, tiotropium) or long-acting beta-agonist 
(LABA)/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) maintenance treatment 
(salmeterol/fluticasone [SFC]).
METHODS: POWER was a single-cohort, prospective, multicenter, interventional 
study in which patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, who remained symptomatic 
on their current treatment of once-daily (od) tiotropium 18 µg or twice-daily 
(bid) SFC (any dose), were switched to treatment with open-label IND/GLY 110/50 
µg od for 16 weeks. Effectiveness end points were change from baseline in trough 
FEV1, transition dyspnea index (TDI) total scores, and COPD assessment test 
(CAT) scores at 16 weeks.
RESULTS: Trough FEV1 improved by 175 mL at Week 16 in patients who switched to 
IND/GLY. The change was 176 mL (95% CI: 135-217) when switched from tiotropium 
and 172 mL (95% CI: 85-258) when switched from SFC fixed-dose combination (FDC). 
At Week 16, significant improvements were observed in the mean TDI total scores 
(Δ=2.5) and CAT scores (Δ=-6.5) after the switch to IND/GLY treatment (both 
P<0.0001). Additionally, IND/GLY was well tolerated in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD, and no safety signal was observed.
CONCLUSION: In clinical practice settings, a direct switch from previous 
treatment with either tiotropium or SFC to IND/GLY was safe and provided 
superior clinically significant improvements in lung function and 
patient-related outcomes in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02202616.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S185485
PMCID: PMC6343749
PMID: 30718952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure AK reports nonfinancial support from 
Novartis, during the conduct of the study; personal fees from Novartis, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Teva, Pfizer, Sanofi, Purdue, and Paladdin; 
and grants and personal fees from Benton Dickinson, outside the submitted work. 
KRC reports grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca, grants and personal fees 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, grants from Baxter, grants and personal fees from CSL 
Behring, grants and personal fees from Grifols, grants from GlaxoSmithKline, 
grants and personal fees from Sanofi, grants and personal fees from Genentech, 
grants and personal fees from Kamada, grants from Amgen, grants and personal 
fees from Roche, grants and personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from 
Merck, and personal fees from CIHR-GSK Research Chair in Respiratory Health Care 
Deliveryat the University Health Network, during the conduct of the study. IM 
reports honoraria for continuing medical education related to COPD and asthma. 
DR is an employee of and reports personal fees from Novartis Pharmaceuticals 
Canada Inc. MD was a former employee of Novartis Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc. 
during this study. SMA reports clinical trial fees and speaking fees from 
Novartis. DP is an employee of and reports personal fees from Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc. DP also reports personal fees from Novartis Pharma 
AG, during the conduct of the study. AM reports honoraria for attending advisory 
boards and providing CME for AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and 
Takeda. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


133. Tuberk Toraks. 2016 Sep;64(3):240-245.

[New bronchodilators and combinations in COPD treatment].

[Article in Turkish]

Günay S(1), Sarıaydın M, Yılmaz Demirci N.

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Chest Diseases, Afyonkarahisar State Hospital, Afyonkarahisar, 
Turkey. sibelgunay@gmail.com.

Bronchodilator drugs are widely used therapeutic agents for treatment of asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In order to mantain 
bronchodilation, both sympathetic system (particularly beta-2 receptors) 
activation and parasympathetic system inhibition (antimuscarinic effect) 
mechanisms are utilized. Over 20 years, there were no significant changes in 
bronchodilator therapy in obstructive pulmonary diseases. In recent years, 
however, after the development of new ultra long acting bronchodilator drugs, a 
single dose inhaler treatments per day in the treatment of stable COPD became a 
current issue. In this review, with the guidence of the current literature, the 
effects of new beta-2 agonists and anticholinergic bronchodilators will be 
discussed.

PMID: 28366158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Respir Med. 2016 May;114:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.02.012. Epub 2016 Mar 2.

Effect of tiotropium on COPD exacerbations: A systematic review.

Halpin DM(1), Vogelmeier C(2), Pieper MP(3), Metzdorf N(4), Richard F(4), 
Anzueto A(5).

Author information:
(1)Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, 
UK. Electronic address: d.halpin@nhs.net.
(2)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipp University of Marburg, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research, Marburg, Germany.
(3)Respiratory Diseases Research, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, 
Biberach, Germany.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Diseases/Critical Care 
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San 
Antonio, TX, USA; The South Texas Veterans Health Care System, Audie L. Murphy 
Memorial Veterans Hospital Division, San Antonio, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Exacerbation frequency is related to disease progression, quality of 
life, and prognosis in COPD. Earlier diagnosis, along with interventions aimed 
at preventing exacerbations and delaying progression, may help reduce the global 
burden of disease. Long-acting inhaled bronchodilators are effective at 
maintaining symptom relief and are recommended as first-choice therapy for more 
symptomatic patients and those at risk of exacerbation.
METHODS: As prevention of exacerbations is a priority goal in COPD management 
and a number of different long-acting bronchodilators are available, we 
conducted a systematic review of exacerbation data from randomized controlled 
trials (published January 2000 to May 2014) comparing the effect of tiotropium 
versus placebo and/or other maintenance therapies.
RESULTS: Exacerbations were a primary endpoint in 12 publications (five studies: 
four comparing tiotropium with placebo; one with active comparator) and a 
secondary endpoint in 17 publications (seven studies: six comparing tiotropium 
with placebo; one with active comparator). Overall, tiotropium was associated 
with a longer time to first exacerbation event and fewer exacerbations 
(including severe exacerbations/hospitalizations) compared with placebo and 
long-acting beta-agonists. Tiotropium also showed similar efficacy to 
glycopyrronium and a fixed long acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting 
beta-agonist combination (glycopyrronium/indacaterol), although not all studies 
were powered to demonstrate differences in exacerbation outcomes. Exacerbation 
outcomes were comparable with both formulations of tiotropium (HandiHaler(®) 
18 μg/Respimat(®) 5 μg).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this comprehensive systematic review demonstrate 
tiotropium is beneficial in reducing exacerbation risk versus placebo or other 
maintenance treatments.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.02.012
PMID: 27109805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jun 18;10:1179-89. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S54154. eCollection 2015.

Profile of a fixed-dose combination of tiotropium/olodaterol and its potential 
in the treatment of COPD.

Muruganandan S(1), Jayaram L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Austin Health, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Western Health, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia ; University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive, debilitating 
disorder that results in frequent exacerbations and impacts quality of life. It 
represents a growing burden of health care cost, both from societal and economic 
perspectives. Short- and long-acting bronchodilators remain the mainstay of 
therapy in COPD patients. New fixed-dose combination inhalers with novel 
pharmacological combinations of long-acting beta-agonists and muscarinic 
antagonists and delivered once-daily through a variety of devices are currently 
being developed and licensed for the treatment of COPD. There is mounting 
research suggesting that combining a fixed dose of a beta-agonist and a muscarinic 
antagonist achieves better bronchodilation and clinical outcomes compared with 
either agent alone. These once-daily dosing inhalers are anticipated to impact 
favorably on patient preference and compliance. This review examines the 
fixed-dose combination of tiotropium bromide and olodaterol delivered by a 
Respimat(®) Soft Mist™ inhaler at doses of 2.5/5 μg and 5/5 μg in 
moderate-to-very-severe COPD, and its potential role in COPD compared with other 
long-acting beta-agonist with long acting muscarinic antagonist combinations and 
delivery devices.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S54154
PMCID: PMC4476436
PMID: 26124657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Dec 13;11:3163-3177. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S92840. eCollection 2016.

Efficacy of tiotropium-olodaterol fixed-dose combination in COPD.

Derom E(1), Brusselle GG(1), Joos GF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium.

Tiotropium-olodaterol, formulated in the Respimat soft-mist inhaler, is an 
inhaled fixed-dose combination (FDC) of a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) and a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), commercialized under the name of 
Spiolto or Stiolto. The efficacy of tiotropium-olodaterol 5-5 μg once daily in 
adult patients with COPD was documented in eleven large, multicenter trials of 
up to 52 weeks duration. Tiotropium-olodaterol 5-5 μg not only improved 
spirometric values to a significantly greater extent than placebo but also 
resulted in statistically significant beneficial effects on dyspnea, markers of 
hyperinflation, use of rescue medication, health-related quality of life, and 
exercise endurance. Improvements exceeded the minimal clinically important 
difference (MCID) for forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), dyspnea, and 
quality of life. Differences between tiotropium-olodaterol 5-5 μg and the 
respective monocomponents were statistically significant for FEV1, dyspnea, 
markers of hyperinflation, use of rescue medication, and health-related quality 
of life, but did not reach the MCID. However, dual bronchodilatation 
significantly increased the number of patients who exceeded the MCID for dyspnea 
and quality of life. Moreover, tiotropium-olodaterol 5-5 μg was significantly 
more effective than salmeterol-fluticasone (FDC) twice daily at improving 
pulmonary function. Differences between tiotropium-olodaterol and other 
LAMA/LABA FDCs were not observed for FEV1 or other efficacy markers. Therefore, 
tiotropium-olodaterol is a valuable option in the treatment of COPD patients who 
remain symptomatic under monotherapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S92840
PMCID: PMC5167492
PMID: 28008243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


137. Drug Ther Bull. 2017 Jan;55(1):2-5. doi: 10.1136/dtb.2017.1.0451. Epub 2017 Jan 
5.

An update on LAMA/LABA combinations for COPD.

[No authors listed]

The management of symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
typically involves the use of inhaled long-acting bronchodilators. Previously, 
we have reviewed the long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) ▼aclidinium,1 
▼glycopyrronium,2 tiotropium3 and ▼umeclidinium,4 and the long-acting beta2 
agonists (LABAs) indacaterol,5 ▼olodaterol,6 and ▼vilanterol (in combination 
with fluticasone) in the management of COPD.7 Four fixed-dose combinations of a 
LAMA with a LABA are now available, all indicated as maintenance bronchodilator 
treatment to relieve symptoms in adult patients with COPD. Here, we provide a 
brief overview of the four combinations and consider the place of a LAMA/LABA in 
people with COPD and any factors that might help to choose between them.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/dtb.2017.1.0451
PMID: 28057707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Apr 15;11:785-97. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S54513. eCollection 2016.

Dual therapy strategies for COPD: the scientific rationale for LAMA + LABA.

Cohen JS(1), Miles MC(2), Donohue JF(3), Ohar JA(2).

Author information:
(1)United Lung and Sleep Clinic, Saint Paul, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC, USA.
(3)University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity, 
mortality, and health care expenditure worldwide. Relaxation of airway smooth 
muscle with inhaled bronchodilators is the cornerstone of treatment for stable 
COPD, with inhaled corticosteroids reserved for those with a history of 
exacerbations. Tiotropium has occupied center stage in COPD treatment for over 
10 years and improves lung function, quality of life, exercise endurance, and 
reduces the risk of COPD exacerbation. Long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) improve 
lung function, reduce dynamic hyperinflation, increase exercise tolerance, 
health-related quality of life, and reduce acute exacerbation of COPD. The 
combination of long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) and LABAs is thought 
to leverage different pathways to induce bronchodilation using submaximal drug 
doses, increasing the benefits and minimizing receptor-specific side effects. 
Umeclidinium/vilanterol is the first combination of LAMA/LABA to be approved for 
use in stable COPD in USA and Europe. Additionally, indacaterol/glycopyrronium 
and aclidinium/formoterol have been approved in Europe and in numerous locations 
outside USA. Several other agents are in the late stages of development, most of 
which offer once-daily dosing. The benefits of new LAMA/LABA combinations 
include improved pulmonary function, dyspnea, and health-related quality of 
life, and in some cases, reduced exacerbations. These evolving treatments will 
provide new opportunities and challenges in the management of COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S54513
PMCID: PMC4841398
PMID: 27143870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Postgrad Med. 2020 Mar;132(2):198-205. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1702834. Epub 
2020 Jan 3.

Current evidence for COPD management with dual long acting muscarinic 
antagonist/long-acting β(2)-agonist bronchodilators.

Skolnik NS(1), Nguyen TS(2), Shrestha A(1), Ray R(3), Corbridge TC(3), Brunton 
SA(4).

Author information:
(1)Family/Community Medicine, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Jenkintown, PA, USA.
(2)Roseman University of Health Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Henderson, NV, 
USA.
(3)US Medical Affairs, GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(4)Primary Care Respiratory Group, Palm Springs, CA, USA.

Long-acting inhaled bronchodilator medications are recommended as initial 
maintenance therapy for many patients with COPD. These medications include 
long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) and long-acting beta-agonists (LABA). 
Combinations of long-acting bronchodilator agents (LAMA/LABA) and inhaled 
corticosteroids combined with LABA (ICS/LABA) are also used as initial or 
follow-up therapy in patients with more severe symptoms or at risk of COPD 
exacerbations. This review summarizes the position of LAMA/LABA combinations in 
treatment recommendations, and the evidence supporting their placement relative 
to LAMA monotherapy and ICS/LABA combination therapy, as well as differences 
within the LAMA/LABA class. Most studies show that LAMA/LABA treatment leads to 
greater improvements in lung function and symptoms than LAMA monotherapy or 
ICS/LABA treatment. There are fewer studies comparing the impact of different 
medication classes on patients' risk of exacerbations; however, the available 
evidence suggests that LAMA/LABA treatment and LAMA monotherapy lead to a 
similar reduction in exacerbation risk, while the effect of LAMA/LABA compared 
with ICS/LABA remains unclear. The incidence of adverse events is similar with 
LAMA/LABA and LAMA alone. There is a lower risk of pneumonia with LAMA/LABA 
compared with ICS/LABA. This evidence supports the use of LAMA/LABA combinations 
as an initial maintenance therapy option for symptomatic patients with low 
exacerbation risk and severe breathlessness or patients with severe symptoms who 
are at risk of exacerbations, and as follow-up treatment in patients with 
uncontrolled symptoms or exacerbations on bronchodilator monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1702834
PMID: 31900019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Sep 26;13:2969-2984. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S171835. eCollection 2018.

Improved lung function and patient-reported outcomes with co-suspension delivery 
technology glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler in COPD: a 
randomized Phase III study conducted in Asia, Europe, and the USA.

Lipworth BJ(1), Collier DJ(2), Gon Y(3), Zhong N(4), Nishi K(5), Chen R(4), 
Arora S(6), Maes A(7), Siddiqui S(8), Reisner C(7)(8), Martin UJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, Ninewells Hospital, University of 
Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK, b.j.lipworth@dundee.ac.uk.
(2)William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(3)Itabashi Hospital, Nihon University School of Medicine, Itabashi, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, State Key Laboratory of 
Respiratory Diseases, National Clinical Research Center of Respiratory Diseases, 
The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
People's Republic of China.
(5)Ishikawa Prefectural Central Hospital, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(6)Aventiv Research Inc., Columbus, OH, USA.
(7)Pearl - a member of the AstraZeneca group, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(8)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: COPD is a major global cause of mortality and morbidity. PINNACLE-4 
evaluated the efficacy and safety of GFF MDI (glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate 
metered dose inhaler) in patients from Asia, Europe, and the USA with 
moderate-to-very severe COPD.
METHODS: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, Phase III study, patients 
were randomized to treatment with GFF MDI 18/9.6 μg, glycopyrrolate (GP) MDI 18 
μg, formoterol fumarate (FF) MDI 9.6 μg, or placebo MDI (all twice daily) for 24 
weeks. Lung function, patient-reported outcomes (symptoms and health-related 
quality of life), and safety were assessed.
RESULTS: Of the 1,756 patients randomized, 1,740 patients were included in the 
intent-to-treat population (mean age 64.2 years, 74.1% male, and 40.2% Asian). 
GFF MDI significantly improved morning predose trough FEV1 at Week 24 (primary 
endpoint) vs placebo MDI, GP MDI, and FF MDI (least squares mean differences: 
165, 59, and 72 mL, respectively; all P<0.0001). GFF MDI also significantly 
improved other lung function endpoints vs placebo MDI, GP MDI, and FF MDI and 
patient-reported outcomes vs placebo MDI and GP MDI. A larger proportion of 
patients treated with GFF MDI achieved the minimum clinically important 
difference in Transition Dyspnea Index score vs GP MDI and placebo MDI and in St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire score vs placebo MDI. Adverse event rates 
were similar across treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrated the efficacy of GFF MDI in patients with 
moderate-to-very severe COPD. GFF MDI was well tolerated, with a safety profile 
commensurate with long-acting bronchodilators.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S171835
PMCID: PMC6167125
PMID: 30310273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure BJL is one of a number of 
co-investigators on an AstraZeneca- sponsored grant received by the University 
of Dundee to support genomic studies in COPD. He has also received speaker fees 
from AstraZeneca; payment for consulting and speaking from Boehringer Ingelheim 
and Chiesi; grant support from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, and Janssen; 
advisory board and speaker fees from Teva; and consulting fees from Sandoz, 
Cipla, Dr Reddys, and Lupin. DJC is supported by the National Institute for 
Health Research (NIHR) Barts Biomedical Research Center and received a grant 
from Pearl – a member of the AstraZeneca group, for normal recruitment of 
patients. YG received payment from AstraZeneca for medical institution costs for 
the clinical study and has received speaker fees from AstraZeneca, Boeh-ringer 
Ingelheim Japan Co., Ltd, and Kyorin Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. NZ has received 
consultancy and lecture fees from Boehringer Ingelheim and Novartis and was on 
the advisory board of the GOLD committee. KN and SA report no conflicts of 
interest in this work. RC is an advisory committee member and speaker for 
AstraZeneca. AM is an employee of Pearl – a member of the AstraZeneca Group. SS 
and UJM are employees of AstraZeneca, with stock options. CR is an employee of 
Pearl – a member of the AstraZeneca group and an employee of AstraZeneca.


141. Respir Med. 2018 Oct;143:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.08.001. Epub 2018 Aug 14.

Trends in the utilisation of COPD therapeutic regimens before and after the 
introduction of LAMA/LABA combination products: A population-based study.

Parkin L(1), Khuu W(2), Stanbrook MB(3), Tadrous M(4), Martins D(5), Gomes T(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive and Social Medicine, Dunedin School of Medicine, 
University of Otago, P.O. Box 56, Dunedin 9054, New Zealand. Electronic address: 
lianne.parkin@otago.ac.nz.
(2)The Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, 
Ontario M4N 3M5, Canada. Electronic address: wayne.khuu@ices.on.ca.
(3)The Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, 
Ontario M4N 3M5, Canada; Division of Respirology, Toronto Western Hospital, East 
Wing, 7th Floor, 399 Bathurst St, Toronto, Ontario M5T 2S8, Canada; The 
Institute for Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
155 College St, Toronto, Ontario M5T 3M6, Canada. Electronic address: 
matthew.stanbrook@uhn.ca.
(4)The Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, 
Ontario M4N 3M5, Canada; Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, 30 Bond St, Toronto, 
Ontario M5B 1W8, Canada; The Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Toronto, 144 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3M2, Canada. Electronic 
address: tadrousm@smh.ca.
(5)Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, 30 Bond St, Toronto, Ontario M5B 1W8, 
Canada. Electronic address: martinsdi@smh.ca.
(6)The Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, 
Ontario M4N 3M5, Canada; The Institute for Health Policy, Management and 
Evaluation, University of Toronto, 155 College St, Toronto, Ontario M5T 3M6, 
Canada; Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, 30 Bond St, Toronto, Ontario M5B 1W8, 
Canada; The Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, 144 College 
Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3M2, Canada. Electronic address: gomest@smh.ca.

INTRODUCTION: long acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta agonist 
(LAMA/LABA) combination products have recently been introduced. We sought to 
describe the impact of these products on patterns of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used administrative healthcare data from Ontario, 
Canada, to identify all residents aged ≥ 65 years who were dispensed a product 
to treat COPD at least once between January 2010 and May 2016, and to calculate 
the monthly prevalence of use of 11 mutually exclusive therapeutic regimens. We 
also compared the characteristics of new users of LAMA/LABA and LAMA + LABA 
regimens.
RESULTS: Overall use of any COPD regimen remained stable in the year following 
the formulary listing of LAMA/LABA combination products in May 2015, as did the 
use of LABA/ICS (most commonly-used regimen). Use of LAMA/LABA and 
LAMA/LABA + ICS (inhaled corticosteroid) regimens rose rapidly to 283 and 56 
users per 100,000 population, respectively, while concurrent falls were seen for 
LAMA + LABA/ICS (2047 to 1944), LAMA + LABA + ICS (30-19), and LAMA + LABA 
(103-63). LAMA and LABA monotherapy use declined (1764 to 1669 and 57 to 51, 
respectively). New users of LAMA/LABA were more likely to be male, 
urban-dwelling, and to have transitioned from LABA/ICS therapy than new users of 
LAMA + LABA, and less likely to have transitioned from LAMA or LABA monotherapy, 
or LAMA + ICS. They were also more likely to have visited a respirologist, and 
less likely to have been hospitalised, at least once in the preceding 180 days.
CONCLUSIONS: The introduction of LAMA/LABA combination products led to 
population-level changes in regimens used for COPD therapy, but no overall 
increase in long-acting therapy use. New users of LAMA/LABA and LAMA + LABA 
regimens transitioned to dual LAMA and LABA therapy through different treatment 
pathways.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.08.001
PMID: 30261979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2018 Mar 15;75(6):359-366. doi: 10.2146/ajhp160979.

Treatment patterns for patients hospitalized with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Amin AN(1), Bollu V(2), Stensland MD(3), Netzer L(3), Ganapathy V(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, CA anamin@uci.edu.
(2)Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ.
(3)Agile Outcomes Research, Rochester, MN.
(4)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals, Marlborough, MA.

Comment in
    Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2018 Sep 1;75(17):1268-1269.

PURPOSE: Medication treatment patterns for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) in inpatient settings were examined, as were the characteristics of 
patients treated with long-acting bronchodilators (LABDs) during 
hospitalization.
METHODS: This retrospective study was conducted using inpatient administrative 
data from hospitals and medical centers nationwide. All patients discharged from 
the hospital from January 1, 2010, through December 31, 2012, who were at least 
40 years of age, had a primary discharge diagnosis of COPD or a secondary 
diagnosis of COPD with a primary diagnosis of a respiratory condition, and 
treatment with a bronchodilator were included. Treatment patterns were described 
for inpatient use of medications, including short-acting β-agonists (SABAs), 
long-acting β-agonists (LABAs), short-acting muscarinic antagonists (SAMAs), and 
long acting muscarinic antagonists. Logistic regression predicted 
characteristics of patients receiving LABDs.
RESULTS: Only 5.5% of patients did not receive an SABA during the 
hospitalization: 71.7% received a single-product SABA, and 46.4% received an 
SABA-SAMA combination product, with some patients switching between or using 
SABA and SABA-SAMA combinations concurrently. Most patients (80.9%) received 
systemic corticosteroids, and nearly all (91.6%) were treated with antibiotics. 
Only 52.2% of patients received LABDs (39.3% LABAs). Patients treated with LABDs 
were more likely to have a primary COPD diagnosis, prior hospitalizations, 
spirometry use, and fewer comorbidities.
CONCLUSION: A review of COPD-related inpatient admissions found that the 
majority of patients received the primary recommended treatments for acute 
exacerbations of COPD (SABAs, systemic corticosteroids, and antibiotics). 
However, maintenance therapy had been initiated for only about half of patients 
before discharge.

Copyright © 2018 by the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp160979
PMID: 29523532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nihon Rinsho. 2016 May;74(5):827-32.

[Role of ICS/LABA on COPD treatment].

[Article in Japanese]

Shibata Y.

In the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
bronchodilators such as long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and long acting 
β agonist(LABA) play key roles for improving respiratory function and symptoms, 
and reducing risk of exacerbation. However, inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), a key 
medicine for bronchial asthma, is limitedly used in COPD treatment. Japanese 
Respiratory Society recommends to use ICS for severe COPD patients who have been 
frequently exacerbated, because previous clinical studies indicated that ICS 
reduces exacerbation in moderate to severe COPD patients. Asthma sometimes 
overlaps with COPD, and symptoms of those patients are not well controlled by 
the bronchodilation therapy alone. Therefore, ICS/LABA or ICS/LAMA should be 
prescribed to those overlapped patients. Concentration of exhaled nitrogen oxide 
and percentage of peripheral eosinophil may be good biomarkers for 
discriminating the COPD patients who have good response to ICS treatment.

PMID: 27254954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Pharmacotherapy. 2017 Apr;37(4):447-455. doi: 10.1002/phar.1913.

Comparative Effectiveness of Long-Acting Beta(2) -Agonist Combined with a 
long acting muscarinic Antagonist or Inhaled Corticosteroid in Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Samp JC(1), Joo MJ(1)(2)(3), Schumock GT(1)(2), Calip GS(1)(2), Pickard 
AS(1)(2), Lee TA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Systems, Outcomes and Policy, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Center for Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomic Research, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy Medicine, Department 
of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

INTRODUCTION: Several dual bronchodilator fixed-dose inhaler medications were 
recently approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). These products combine a long-acting beta -agonist (LABA) and long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA). In clinical trials, the separate mechanisms of the 
bronchodilators resulted in improved lung function. COPD treatment guidelines 
currently recommend combination LABA/LAMA as alternative therapy to combination 
LABA/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS). Evidence is limited on the comparative 
effectiveness of LABA/LAMA and LABA/ICS in COPD. The objective of this study was 
to compare real-world COPD exacerbation rates among patients treated with 
LABA/LAMA with those treated with LABA/ICS.
METHODS: This was a retrospective observational study of COPD patients in the 
United States treated with LABA/LAMA or LABA/ICS combination. Insurance claims 
from January 1, 2004, through December 31, 2014, were used as the data source. 
Patients were required to have greater than one prescription filled for the 
combination medications, and they were followed from 30 days after drug 
initiation. Individuals were censored if they discontinued a study medication, 
initiated medication from the opposite cohort (LAMA or ICS), lost enrollment 
eligibility, or at the study period end. Exacerbation rates were compared using 
Poisson regression.
RESULTS: There were 5384 patients in the LABA/LAMA cohort and 473,388 patients 
in the LABA/ICS cohort. The LABA/LAMA cohort was older, had more comorbidities, 
and more severe COPD. Unadjusted annual exacerbation rates were 2.87 events per 
person-year (standard deviation [SD] 5.14) in the LABA/LAMA cohort and 1.68 (SD 
9.82) in the LABA/ICS cohort. The adjusted incidence rate ratio was 0.98 (95% 
confidence interval 0.95-1.01) for LABA/LAMA compared with LABA/ICS.
CONCLUSIONS: The LABA/LAMA combination had similar effectiveness to LABA/ICS as 
measured by exacerbation rates in COPD patients. As a result, characteristics 
other than effectiveness, such as symptom control, cost, patient preferences, 
and adverse events, may be important in selecting between the two regimens.

© 2017 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/phar.1913
PMID: 28226405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Respir Res. 2017 Jan 18;18(1):19. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0506-0.

Is aclidinium alone or combined with a LABA a rational choice for symptomatic 
COPD patients?

Blasi F(1), Canonica GW(2), Miravitlles M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Cardio-thoracic unit and Cystic Fibrosis Adult Center Fondazione IRCCS 
Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Milano, Milan, Italy. 
francesco.blasi@unimi.it.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, Personalized Medicine Clinic: Asthma & 
Allergy - Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Humanitas University -Rozzano 
(Milano), Milan, Italy.
(3)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    Respir Res. 2017 Feb 10;18(1):35.

BACKGROUND: As emphasized by international recommendations and largely confirmed 
by clinical experience, long-acting bronchodilators play a central role in the 
maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) due to 
their proven efficacy in reducing airflow obstruction and improving symptoms.
MAIN BODY: There are some important aspects to define with regard to inhalation 
therapy for COPD, particularly those concerning the selection criteria and the 
optimal use of long-acting bronchodilators. First of all, it needs to be 
determined in which patients and clinical situations monotherapy with one 
bronchodilator, such as a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), should be 
considered adequate, and in which cases the use of combination therapies, such 
as the "double bronchodilation" with a LAMA and a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), 
should be preferred. Another critical issue concerns the effect of the frequency 
of daily administration of inhaled agents on the control of symptoms during the 
24 h. COPD symptoms are known to exhibit considerable circadian variability with 
worsening in the early morning, and a significant proportion of patients have 
disease-related sleep disorders which can adversely affect their quality of 
life. The worsening of symptoms in the early morning may be due, at least in 
part, to a reduction in airway caliber caused by an increased "cholinergic tone" 
at night. As such, the coverage of nighttime and early morning symptoms is a 
reasonable therapeutic goal, which can be achieved by many patients using LAMAs 
such as aclidinium bromide twice daily (BID). Therapeutic adherence is known to 
be a multifactorial phenomenon that is frequently affected by other aspects than 
dosing frequency, including the technical features and ease of use of the 
inhalers. To this end, it should be mentioned that certain new-generation 
inhalers such as Genuair® have been associated in clinical trials with higher 
patient preference.
CONCLUSION: In this work, in addition to presenting an overview of the main 
evidence on the efficacy of COPD treatment with the LAMA aclidinium bromide BID, 
we suggest some selection criteria for the monotherapy with one long-acting 
bronchodilator or the combination therapy with LAMA and LABA in COPD patients, 
with particular reference to specific clinical scenarios.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0506-0
PMCID: PMC5242048
PMID: 28100244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Pneumologie. 2018 Feb;72(2):132-137. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-118889. Epub 2017 Nov 
20.

[The Overrated Impact of Inhaled Substances (LABA, LAMA, ICS) on Exacerbation 
Rates in COPD].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Köhler D(1), Dellweg D(2).

Author information:
(1)Schmallenberg, Winkhausen.
(2)Fachkrankenhaus Kloster Grafschaft, Schmallenberg.

Erratum in
    Pneumologie. 2018 Feb;72(2):e1.

Numerous studies have shown that exacerbation rates in COPD can be significantly 
reduced by long acting beta-2-agonists (LABA), long acting anticholinergic 
agents (LAMA) and inhaled steroids (ICS). Elaborate and extensive investigations 
however failed to prove that the reduction in exacerbation rates leads to life 
prolongation. As opposed to this, numerous studies have shown a reduction in 
life expectancy with increasing number and severity of exacerbations.This review 
aimed at comparing these studies and to elaborate the relevance and reduction of 
exacerbations rates by LABA, LAMA and ICS application through effect size 
calculation by means of Cohens' d. These studies display a common pattern. The 
reduction of exacerbation rates is only being achieved for less severe 
exacerbations (Cohens' d max. 0.21). For more severe exacerbations and for the 
comparison of different substances Cohens' d remains below 0.1, indicating that 
the effect of the medications is practically irrelevant. The impact of LABA's, 
LAMA's and ICS on exacerbation rates in COPD patients is obviously overrated.

Publisher: Durch zahlreiche Studien ist belegt, dass inhalative, langwirksame 
Beta-2-Mimetika (LABA) und Anticholinergika (LAMA) sowie Steroide (ICS) die 
Exazerbationsrate bei COPD signifikant reduzieren. Allerdings konnte auch in 
aufwendigen und länger dauernden Studien nicht gezeigt werden, dass diese 
Reduktion der Exazerbation auch die Lebenserwartung reduziert. Im Gegensatz dazu 
zeigen zahlreiche Studien, dass die Lebenserwartung mit zunehmender Schwere und 
Häufigkeit der Exazerbation vermindert wird.In dieser Übersicht werden diese 
Studien gegenübergestellt und die Relevanz der Reduktion der Exazerbationsraten 
durch LABA, LAMA und ICS durch Bewertung ihrer Effektstärke mittels Cohen’s d 
bewertet. Dabei zeigt sich in den Studien ein gleiches Muster. Die Reduktion der 
Exazerbationsrate zeigt nur bei den geringen Schweregraden einen kleinen Effekt 
(Cohen’s d max. 0,21). Bei Exazerbation mit höherem Schweregrad und bei 
Vergleich der Substanzen untereinander fällt Cohen’s d unter 0,1, was zeigt, 
dass die Wirkung der Medikamente klinisch praktisch bedeutungslos ist. Die 
Wirkung von LABA, LAMA und ICS auf die Exazerbationsrate bei COPD ist deutlich 
überschätzt.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-118889
PMID: 29156455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autoren geben an, dass kein 
Interessenkonflikt besteht.


147. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Sep 28;12:2787-2793. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S147968. eCollection 2017.

Trends in health care resource utilization and pharmacological management of 
COPD in Taiwan from 2004 to 2010.

Tsai YH(#)(1), Yang TM(#)(1)(2)(3), Lin CM(1)(2), Huang SY(1), Wen YW(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Chiayi.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine.
(3)School of Traditional Chinese Medicine.
(4)Clinical Informatics and Medical Statistics Research Center, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

RATIONALE: COPD has attracted widespread attention worldwide. The prevalence of 
COPD in Taiwan has been reported, but little is known about trends in health 
care resource utilization and pharmacologic management in COPD treatment.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this article was to study trends in health care 
resource utilization, pharmacologic management, and medical costs of COPD 
treatment in Taiwan.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Reimbursement claims in the Taiwan National Health 
Insurance System from 2004 to 2010 were collected. The disease burden of COPD, 
including health care resource utilization and medical costs, was evaluated.
RESULTS: The pharmacy cost of COPD increased from 2004 to 2010 due to the 
increased utilization of long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and fixed-dose 
combination of long-acting beta-agonist and inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS), 
whereas the cost of all other COPD-related medications decreased. The average 
outpatient department (OPD) cost per patient increased 29.3% from 1,070 USD in 
2004 to 1,383 USD in 2010. The highest average total medical cost per patient 
was 3,434 USD in 2005, and it decreased 12.4% to 3,008 USD in 2010. There was no 
significant difference in the average number of OPD visits and emergency 
department visits per patient. The highest average number of hospital admissions 
was 0.81 in 2005, and it decreased to 0.65 in 2010. The average number of 
intensive care unit (ICU) admissions decreased from 0.52 in 2005 to 0.31 in 
2010.
CONCLUSION: From 2004 to 2010, the average total medical cost per patient of 
COPD was slightly decreased because of the decreased average number of hospital 
admissions and ICU admissions. The costs of both LAMA and LABA/ICS increased, 
while the cost for all other COPD-related medications decreased. These findings 
suggest that the increased utilization of LAMA and LABA/ICS may have contributed 
to the decreased average number of hospital admissions and ICU admissions in 
COPD patients from 2004 to 2010.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S147968
PMCID: PMC5627724
PMID: 29026296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


148. Adv Ther. 2018 Oct;35(10):1626-1638. doi: 10.1007/s12325-018-0771-4. Epub 2018 
Sep 6.

Preventing Clinically Important Deterioration of COPD with Addition of 
Umeclidinium to Inhaled Corticosteroid/Long-Acting β(2)-Agonist Therapy: An 
Integrated Post Hoc Analysis.

Naya IP(1), Tombs L(2), Lipson DA(3), Compton C(4).

Author information:
(1)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, Brentford, Middlesex, UK. 
ian.p.naya@gsk.com.
(2)Precise Approach Ltd., Stockley Park West, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(3)Respiratory Clinical Development, GSK, Collegeville, PA, USA.
(4)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, Brentford, Middlesex, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Assessing clinically important measures of disease progression is 
essential for evaluating therapeutic effects on disease stability in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This analysis assessed whether providing 
additional bronchodilation with the long acting muscarinic antagonist 
umeclidinium (UMEC) to patients treated with inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS)/long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) therapy would improve disease stability 
compared with ICS/LABA therapy alone.
METHODS: This integrated post hoc analysis of four 12-week, randomized, 
double-blind trials (NCT01772134, NCT01772147, NCT01957163, NCT02119286) 
compared UMEC 62.5 µg with placebo added to open-label ICS/LABA in symptomatic 
patients with COPD (modified Medical Research Council dyspnea scale score ≥ 2). 
A clinically important deterioration (CID) was defined as: a decrease from 
baseline of ≥ 100 mL in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), an 
increase from baseline of ≥ 4 units in St George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) total score, or a moderate/severe exacerbation. Risk of a first CID was 
evaluated in the intent-to-treat (ITT) population and in patients stratified by 
Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) classification, 
exacerbation history and type of ICS/LABA therapy. Adverse events (AEs) were 
also assessed.
RESULTS: Overall, 1637 patients included in the ITT population received 
UMEC + ICS/LABA (n = 819) or placebo + ICS/LABA (n = 818). Additional 
bronchodilation with UMEC reduced the risk of a first CID by 45-58% in the ITT 
population and all subgroups analyzed compared with placebo (all p < 0.001). 
Improvements were observed in reducing FEV1 (69% risk reduction; p < 0.001) and 
exacerbation (47% risk reduction; p = 0.004) events in the ITT population. No 
significant reduction in risk of a SGRQ CID was observed. AE incidence was 
similar between treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: Symptomatic patients with COPD receiving ICS/LABA experience 
frequent deteriorations. Additional bronchodilation with UMEC significantly 
reduced the risk of CID and provided greater short-term stability versus 
continued ICS/LABA therapy in these patients.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline (study number: 202067). Plain language summary 
available for this article.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-018-0771-4
PMCID: PMC6182634
PMID: 30191464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Apr 11;12:1125-1133. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S125594. eCollection 2017.

Approaches to drug therapy for COPD in Russia: a proposed therapeutic algorithm.

Zykov KA(1), Ovcharenko SI(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pulmonology, Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry 
named after A.I. Evdokimov.
(2)I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.

Until recently, there have been few clinical algorithms for the management of 
patients with COPD. Current evidence-based clinical management guidelines can 
appear to be complex, and they lack clear step-by-step instructions. For these 
reasons, we chose to create a simple and practical clinical algorithm for the 
management of patients with COPD, which would be applicable to real-world 
clinical practice, and which was based on clinical symptoms and spirometric 
parameters that would take into account the pathophysiological heterogeneity of 
COPD. This optimized algorithm has two main fields, one for nonspecialist 
treatment by primary care and general physicians and the other for treatment by 
specialized pulmonologists. Patients with COPD are treated with long-acting 
bronchodilators and short-acting drugs on a demand basis. If the forced 
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) is ≥50% of predicted and symptoms are 
mild, treatment with a single long acting muscarinic antagonist or long-acting 
beta-agonist is proposed. When FEV1 is <50% of predicted and/or the COPD 
assessment test score is ≥10, the use of combined bronchodilators is advised. If 
there is no response to treatment after three months, referral to a pulmonary 
specialist is recommended for pathophysiological endotyping: 1) eosinophilic 
endotype with peripheral blood or sputum eosinophilia >3%; 2) neutrophilic 
endotype with peripheral blood neutrophilia >60% or green sputum; or 3) 
pauci-granulocytic endotype. It is hoped that this simple, optimized, 
step-by-step algorithm will help to individualize the treatment of COPD in 
real-world clinical practice. This algorithm has yet to be evaluated 
prospectively or by comparison with other COPD management algorithms, including 
its effects on patient treatment outcomes. However, it is hoped that this 
algorithm may be useful in daily clinical practice for physicians treating 
patients with COPD in Russia.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S125594
PMCID: PMC5396832
PMID: 28442899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


150. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2016 Jul;10(7):767-80. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2016.1190276. Epub 2016 May 30.

Efficacy and safety of LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations approved in the US for 
the management of COPD.

Banerji D(1), Mahler DA(2)(3), Hanania NA(4).

Author information:
(1)a Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation , East Hanover , NJ , USA.
(2)b Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth , Hanover , NH , USA.
(3)c Valley Regional Hospital , Hanover , NH , USA.
(4)d Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asthma and COPD Clinical 
Research Center , Baylor College of Medicine , Houston , TX , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Long-acting beta-agonists [LABAs] and long acting muscarinic 
antagonists [LAMAs]) are primary therapies for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). Despite improvements in lung function and patient-reported 
outcomes (PROs) with these therapies, there is room to optimize outcomes 
further. Combined use of LABAs and LAMAs is recommended when symptoms are not 
improved with a single agent, and LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) are 
at the forefront of drug development in COPD.
AREAS COVERED: This review focusses on the three LABA/LAMA FDCs 
(indacaterol/glycopyrrolate(1) [IND/GLY] 27.5/15.6 µg twice daily, 
umeclidinium/vilanterol [UMEC/VI] 62.5/25 µg once daily and 
tiotropium/olodaterol [Tio/Olo] 5/5 µg once daily approved in the US. Phase III 
clinical trials have shown benefits in lung function, dyspnea and health status 
with FDCs of IND/GLY, UMEC/VI and Tio/Olo versus placebo and monotherapies. 
Expert commentary: Data from recent studies of three LABA/LAMA combinations, 
reviewed here, indicate that dual bronchodilation may be beneficial above and 
beyond both the monotherapies and LABA/ICS combinations, in providing 
improvements in lung function and PROs for patients with COPD, which may 
encourage a shift away from the use of ICS in COPD management, in particular for 
non-exacerbating patients.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2016.1190276
PMID: 27223863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Jan 8;13:203-215. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S145285. eCollection 2018.

Relationship between exercise endurance and static hyperinflation in a post hoc 
analysis of two clinical trials in patients with COPD.

Singh S(1), Maltais F(2), Tombs L(3), Fahy WA(4), Vahdati-Bolouri M(4), 
Locantore N(5), Riley JH(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Exercise and Rehabilitation Science, University Hospitals of 
Leicester NHS Trust, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, UK.
(2)Centre de Pneumologie, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de 
Pneumologie de Québec, Université Laval, QC, Canada.
(3)Precise Approach Ltd, London, UK.
(4)GSK, Stockley Park West, Uxbridge, UK.
(5)GSK, King of Prussia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Lung hyperinflation and exercise intolerance are hallmarks of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, their relationship 
remains uncertain. A combined analysis of two placebo-controlled, randomized 
studies examined the effects of the long acting muscarinic antagonist 
umeclidinium (UMEC) and long-acting beta-agonist vilanterol (VI) separately and in 
combination on static hyperinflation, exercise endurance time (EET), and their 
relationship in patients with COPD.
METHODS: Patients with moderate-to-severe stable COPD and resting functional 
residual capacity >120% predicted were randomized to UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg, UMEC 
62.5 μg, VI 25 μg, or placebo for 12 weeks. Inspiratory capacity (IC), residual 
volume (RV), total lung capacity (TLC), and EET in an endurance shuttle-walk 
test were measured. In this post hoc analysis, IC/TLC, RV/TLC, and IC were used 
as hyperinflation markers.
RESULTS: After 12 weeks, UMEC/VI and UMEC and VI showed significant improvements 
in hyperinflation versus placebo when measured by absolute change from baseline 
in IC/TLC (trough and 3 hours postdose [P≤0.011]). UMEC/VI showed significant 
improvements versus UMEC and VI in absolute changes in IC/TLC (trough and 3 
hours postdose [P≤0.001]). Statistical significance for comparisons with placebo 
and between treatments for absolute changes in IC and percentage changes in 
RV/TLC followed similar patterns to those for absolute changes in IC/TLC. 
UMEC/VI showed significant improvements in EET versus placebo at day 2 and week 
12, measured as change from baseline in seconds (P≤0.002) and as a percentage 
from baseline (P≤0.005). There was a lack of evidence to suggest a correlation 
between improvements in static hyperinflation and EET at any time point.
CONCLUSION: Although the dual bronchodilator UMEC/VI demonstrated greater 
improvements in static hyperinflation markers than UMEC or VI and significant 
improvements in exercise endurance, no direct relationship was observed between 
static hyperinflation and exercise endurance.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S145285
PMCID: PMC5764300
PMID: 29386889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure SS was supported by the Collaboration 
for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care (CLAHRC) East Midlands and 
the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Leicester Biomedical Research 
Centre. The views expressed are those of the author(s), and not necessarily 
those of the National Health Service (NHS), NIHR, or Department of Health. SS 
was also involved in the development of the endurance shuttle-walk test, and has 
served on advisory boards for AstraZeneca, GSK, and Novartis. FM has received 
fees for speaking at conferences sponsored by Boehringer Ingelheim, Grifols, and 
Novartis, research grants for participating in multicenter trials sponsored by 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, and Novartis, and unrestricted research 
grants from Boehringer Ingelheim and Novartis. FM holds a Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research (CIHR)/GSK research chair on COPD. LT is a contingent worker on 
assignment at GSK. WAF, MVB, NL, and JHR are employees of GSK and hold 
stock/shares in GSK. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


152. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Feb 22;13:653-663. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S153969. eCollection 2018.

Real-life evaluation of COPD treatment in a Bulgarian population: a 1-year 
prospective, observational, noninterventional study.

Ivanov Y(1), Nikolaev I(2), Nemeth I(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Pneumonology and Phthisiatry, UMHAT "Dr G Stranski" Pleven, 
Pleven.
(2)Novartis Bulgaria EOOD, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)AdWare Research, Balatonfüred, Hungary.

INTRODUCTION: This was the first study designed to prospectively evaluate 
treatment patterns in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and the 
degree of adherence with the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease (GOLD) strategy recommendations in routine clinical practice in 
Bulgaria.
METHODS: The study was conducted in an outpatient setting and enrolled patients 
of both genders, aged >40 years, who were diagnosed with COPD (as per GOLD 
2013). Evaluations were performed at baseline and at 6- and 12-month visits.
RESULTS: Of the 811 enrolled patients, 719 were assessed and completed the 
12-month observation period. Overall, a substantial number of patients 
experienced moderate airflow limitation (~49% patients, GOLD 2 as per GOLD 2013; 
mean postbronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second value was ~50% of 
the predicted value), belonged to GOLD group D (~51% patients), and had COPD 
assessment test score ≥10 or modified Medical Research Council score ≥2 (~79% 
patients), and ≤1 exacerbation in the past 1 year (~80% patients). Short-acting 
beta-agonists (~63% patients), inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting beta-agonist 
fixed-dose combination (~62% patients), and long acting muscarinic antagonists 
(~59% patients) were the most frequently used medications at all visits, 
regardless of severity. High levels of deviation from GOLD recommendations were 
observed in GOLD groups A and B patients. The deviation comprised high use of 
inhaled corticosteroid-containing regimens in ~45% and 63% of patients in GOLD 
groups A and B, respectively. Only 25 (3%) of the 796 patients reported at least 
one adverse event.
CONCLUSION: The routine clinical practice for COPD in Bulgaria deviates from the 
GOLD recommendations largely in patients at a low risk (GOLD groups A and B), 
while the deviation was lesser in those at a higher risk (GOLD groups C and D).

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S153969
PMCID: PMC5826204
PMID: 29503539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Yavor Ivanov has received honoraria 
for delivering lectures for Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim Chiesi, and Roche, and reports no other conflicts of interest in this 
work. Ivan Nikolaev is a Novartis employee and reports no other conflicts of 
interest in this work. Imola Nemeth reports no conflicts of interest in this 
work.


153. BMC Pulm Med. 2017 Dec 8;17(1):179. doi: 10.1186/s12890-017-0527-y.

Access to affordable medicines and diagnostic tests for asthma and COPD in sub 
Saharan Africa: the Ugandan perspective.

Kibirige D(1)(2), Kampiire L(3), Atuhe D(4), Mwebaze R(5), Katagira W(6), 
Muttamba W(6), Nantanda R(6)(7), Worodria W(8), Kirenga B(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Uganda Martyrs Hospital Lubaga, P.O. BOX 7146, 
Kampala, Uganda. kibirigedavis@gmail.com.
(2)Medical unit, GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceutical Kenya Limited, Kampala, Uganda. 
kibirigedavis@gmail.com.
(3)Infectious Disease Research Collaboration (IDRC), Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Department of Medicine, Case hospital Kampala, Kampala, Uganda.
(5)Department of Medicine, St. Francis hospital Nsambya, Kampala, Uganda.
(6)Makerere Lung Institute, Makerere University College of Health Sciences, 
Kampala, Uganda.
(7)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Makerere University College of 
Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
(8)Division of Pulmonology, Mulago National Referral and Teaching hospital, 
Kampala, Uganda.

BACKGROUND: Equitable access to affordable medicines and diagnostic tests is an 
integral component of optimal clinical care of patients with asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In Uganda, we lack contemporary data about 
the availability, cost and affordability of medicines and diagnostic tests 
essential in asthma and COPD management.
METHODS: Data on the availability, cost and affordability of 17 medicines and 2 
diagnostic tests essential in asthma and COPD management were collected from 22 
public hospitals, 23 private and 85 private pharmacies. The percentage of the 
available medicines and diagnostic tests, the median retail price of the lowest 
priced generic brand and affordability in terms of the number of days' wages it 
would cost the least paid public servant were analysed.
RESULTS: The availability of inhaled short acting beta agonists (SABA), oral 
leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA), inhaled LABA-ICS combinations and 
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in all the study sites was 75%, 60.8%, 46.9% and 
45.4% respectively. None of the study sites had inhaled long acting anti 
muscarinic agents (LAMA) and inhaled long acting beta agonist (LABA)-LAMA 
combinations. Spirometry and peak flow-metry as diagnostic tests were available 
in 24.4% and 6.7% of the study sites respectively. Affordability ranged from 2.2 
days' wages for inhaled salbutamol to 17.1 days' wages for formoterol/budesonide 
inhalers and 27.8 days' wages for spirometry.
CONCLUSION: Medicines and diagnostic tests essential in asthma and COPD care are 
not widely available in Uganda and remain largely unaffordable. Strategies to 
improve access to affordable asthma and COPD medicines and diagnostic tests 
should be implemented in Uganda.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-017-0527-y
PMCID: PMC5721472
PMID: 29216852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Ethical approval to conduct this study was granted by the ethics review board of 
St. Francis hospital, Nsambya Uganda as approved by the Uganda National Council 
of Science and Technology (UNCST). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: No individual 
person’s data in any form (details, image and videos) was used in this 
manuscript. COMPETING INTERESTS: DK works in the medical unit of GlaxoSmithKline 
(GSK) pharmaceutical Kenya Limited in Uganda. GSK did not participate in the 
study funding, design or analysis of the data. The views expressed in this 
manuscript are solely the author’s (DK). The rest of the authors declare no 
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


154. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jun 21;12:1825-1836. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S129007. eCollection 2017.

A retrospective study to assess clinical characteristics and time to initiation 
of open-triple therapy among patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, newly established on long-acting mono- or combination therapy.

Mapel D(1), Laliberté F(2), Roberts MH(1)(3), Sama SR(4), Sundaresan D(4), Pilon 
D(2), Lefebvre P(2), Duh MS(5), Patel J(6).

Author information:
(1)Health Services Research Division, Lovelace Clinic Foundation, Albuquerque, 
NM, USA.
(2)Groupe d'analyse, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Pharmacy Practice and Administrative Sciences, University of 
New Mexico, College of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM.
(4)Research Department, Reliant Medical Group, Worcester, MA.
(5)Analysis Group, Boston, MA.
(6)US Health Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: An incremental approach using open-triple therapy may improve 
outcomes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, 
there is little sufficient, real-world evidence available identifying time to 
open-triple initiation.
METHODS: This retrospective study of patients with COPD, newly initiated on 
long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) monotherapy or inhaled 
corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist (ICS/LABA) combination therapy, assessed 
baseline demographics, clinical characteristics, and exacerbations during 12 
months prior to first LAMA or ICS/LABA use. Time to initiation of open-triple 
therapy was assessed for 12 months post-index date. Post hoc analyses were 
performed to assess the subsets of patients with pulmonary-function test (PFT) 
information and patients with and without comorbid asthma.
RESULTS: Demographics and clinical characteristics were similar between cohorts 
in the pre-specified and post hoc analyses. In total, 283 (19.3%) and 160 
(10.9%) patients had moderate and severe exacerbations at baseline, 
respectively, in the LAMA cohort, compared with 482 (21.3%) and 289 (12.8%) 
patients in the ICS/LABA cohort. Significantly more patients initiated 
open-triple therapy in the LAMA cohort compared with the ICS/LABA cohort (226 
[15.4%] versus 174 [7.7%]; P<0.001); results were similar in the post hoc 
analyses. Mean (standard deviation) time to open-triple therapy was 79.8 (89.0) 
days in the LAMA cohort and 122.9 (105.4) days in the ICS/LABA cohort (P<0.001). 
This trend was also observed in the post hoc analyses, though the difference 
between cohorts was nonsignificant in the subset of patients with PFT 
information.
DISCUSSION: In this population, patients with COPD are more likely to initiate 
open-triple therapy following LAMA therapy, compared with ICS/LABA therapy. 
Further research is required to identify factors associated with the need for 
treatment augmentation among patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S129007
PMCID: PMC5485896
PMID: 28684905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures DM and MHR were employed by Lovelace 
Clinic Foundation at the time this study was conducted. Besides the funding 
Lovelace Clinic Foundation received to conduct this study, both have received 
grant funding from Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc., GSK, 
EndoPharmaceuticals, and Pfizer Inc. to conduct other COPD-related research. DM 
has also received grant funding from Sunovian Pharmaceuticals for other research 
unrelated to this project. SRS and DS are employees of Reliant Medical Group, 
who received research funding from GSK to conduct the study. DP, FL, MSD, and PL 
are employees of Groupe d’analyse/Analysis Group, a consulting company that 
received research funds from GSK to conduct the study. Groupe d’analyse/Analysis 
Group has also received research funds from GSK, Novartis, Janssen 
Pharmaceutical Affairs, LLC, Bayer, and other pharmaceutical companies to 
conduct other respiratory disease studies. JP was an employee of GSK at the time 
of study conduct and owned stocks and shares in GSK. He is currently employed 
by, and owns stocks and shares in, Amgen. The authors report no other conflicts 
of interest in this work.


155. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2017 Mar;26(3):319-329. doi: 
10.1080/13543784.2017.1287172. Epub 2017 Feb 6.

Investigational beta-2 adrenergic agonists for the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Malerba M(1), Radaeli A(2), Montuschi P(3), Babu KS(4), Morjaria JB(5).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Internal Medicine , University of Brescia and ASST Spedali 
Civili , Brescia , Italy.
(2)b Department of Emergency , ASST Spedali Civili , Brescia , Italy.
(3)c Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine , University Hospital 
Agostino Gemelli Foundation Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, 
Pharmacology , Rome , Italy.
(4)d Department of Respiratory Medicine , Queen Alexandra Hospital, Cosham , 
Portsmouth , UK.
(5)e Department of Respiratory Medicine , Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Trust, 
Harefield Hospital , Harefield , UK.

Long-acting bronchodilators are pivotal in the therapeutic management of COPD 
patients with moderate-to-severe airflow obstruction. New ultra-long-acting 
beta-agnoists (ultra-LABAs) have been developed, some of which have been licensed 
for use as monotherapy and/or in combination with other bronchodilators or 
inhaled corticosteroids, for use in COPD patients with persistent symptoms and 
worsening airflow limitation. These new agents are faster in onset and have a 
prolonged duration of action, with a similar safety profile to the traditional 
twice-daily bronchodilators which may have an impact on patient concordance. 
Areas covered: A number of these ultra-LABAs are still under development and 
bi-functional hybrid molecules containing regions functioning as beta-agonists, 
and as muscarinic agonists (MABAs) has been developed. This review summarizes 
these (excluding the licensed ultra-LABAs) with attention on phase II studies 
data available to-date on their pharmacological profiles, clinical efficacy and 
safety, and future perspectives. Expert opinion: Despite all the new agents' 
available, the challenges that persist include any differences in efficacy and 
safety between the various possible LAMA/LABA combinations, relative advantages 
of MABAs over fixed-dose LAMA/LABAs, and the impact of these new molecules in 
terms of long term safety, especially in certain populations in co-morbidities 
frequently associated with COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/13543784.2017.1287172
PMID: 28117615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Respir Res. 2017 Jun 20;18(1):125. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0601-2.

Optimizing bronchodilation in the prevention of COPD exacerbations.

Miravitlles M(1), Anzueto A(2), Jardim JR(3).

Author information:
(1)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron. CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain. 
mmiravitlles@vhebron.net.
(2)University of Texas Health Science Center, and South Texas Veterans Health 
Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(3)Respiratory Division, Escola Paulista de Medicina / Federal University de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The natural disease course of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is 
often punctuated by exacerbations: acute events of symptom worsening associated 
with significant morbidity and healthcare resource utilization; reduced quality 
of life; and increased risk of hospitalization and death. The Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) recommend that patients at risk of 
exacerbations (GOLD Groups C and D) receive a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) or a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA)/LAMA combination, respectively, as 
preferred initial treatments. The latter recommendation is based on recent trial 
evidence demonstrating the superior efficacy of a fixed-dose LABA/LAMA over an 
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/LABA in exacerbation prevention. ICS in combination 
with a LABA is also indicated for prevention of exacerbations, but the use of 
ICS is associated with an increased risk of adverse events such as pneumonia, 
and offers limited benefits beyond those provided by LABA or LAMA monotherapy. 
In this review, we examine evidence from a number of pivotal studies of LABAs 
and LAMAs, administered as monotherapy or as part of dual or triple combination 
therapy, with a specific focus on their effect on exacerbations. We also discuss 
a new proposed treatment paradigm for the management of COPD that takes into 
account this recent evidence and adopts a more cautious approach to the use of 
ICS. In alignment with GOLD 2017, we suggest that ICS should be reserved for 
patients with concomitant asthma or in whom exacerbations persist despite 
treatment with LABA/LAMA.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0601-2
PMCID: PMC5477752
PMID: 28633665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Jun 12;13:1873-1888. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S162646. eCollection 2018.

Inhaled glycopyrrolate for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Tashkin DP(1), Gross NJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University Medical Research LLC, Saint Francis 
Hospital and Medical Center, Hartford, CT, USA.

long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), along with long-acting beta-agonists 
(LABAs), are the mainstay for treatment of patients with COPD. Glycopyrrolate, 
or glycopyrronium bromide, like other LAMAs, inhibits parasympathetic nerve 
impulses by selectively blocking the binding of acetylcholine to muscarinic 
receptors. Glycopyrrolate is unusual in that it preferentially binds to M3 over 
M2 muscarinic receptors, thereby specifically targeting the primary muscarinic 
receptor responsible for bronchoconstriction occurring in COPD. Inhaled 
glycopyrrolate is slowly absorbed from the lungs and rapidly eliminated from the 
bloodstream, most likely by renal excretion in its unmetabolized form, limiting 
the potential for systemic adverse events. Inhaled glycopyrrolate is a 
fast-acting, efficacious treatment option for patients with moderate-severe 
COPD. It improves lung function, reduces the risk of exacerbations, and 
alleviates the symptoms of breathlessness, which in turn may explain the 
improvement seen in patients' quality of life. Inhaled formulations containing 
glycopyrrolate are well tolerated, and despite being an anticholinergic, few 
cardiovascular-related events have been reported. Inhaled glycopyrrolate is thus 
of value as both monotherapy and in combination with other classes of medication 
for maintenance treatment of COPD. This review covers the mechanism of action of 
inhaled glycopyrrolate, including its pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and 
safety profiles, and effects on mucus secretion. It also discusses the use of 
inhaled glycopyrrolate in the treatment of COPD, as monotherapy and in 
fixed-dose combinations with LABAs and inhaled corticosteroid-LABAs, including a 
triple therapy recently approved in Europe.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S162646
PMCID: PMC6003532
PMID: 29928118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure DPT serves on advisory boards for 
AstraZeneca, Sunovion, Mylan, and Theravance/Innoviva, and as a speaker for 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, and Sunovion. NJG has no conflicts of 
interest.


158. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2016 Nov 3;26:16061. doi: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2016.61.

First maintenance therapy for COPD in the UK between 2009 and 2012: a 
retrospective database analysis.

Price D(1), Miravitlles M(2), Pavord I(3), Thomas M(4), Wedzicha J(5), Haughney 
J(1), Bichel K(6), West D(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Academic Primary Care, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(2)Department of Pneumology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Ciber de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Department of Primary Care Research, University of Southampton, Southampton, 
UK.
(5)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, 
London, UK.
(6)Research in Real-Life Ltd, Cambridge, UK.

Clinical guidelines recommend long-acting bronchodilators as first maintenance 
therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), with inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) reserved for patients with more severe disease and 
exacerbations. The aim of this analysis was to examine real-life prescribing of 
first maintenance therapy for COPD in the UK. Data were extracted from the UK 
Optimum Patient Care Research Database for patients with a first prescription 
for COPD maintenance therapy between 2009 and 2012 and a diagnosis of COPD at or 
before the date of the first prescription for COPD maintenance therapy. Routine 
clinical data including demographics, disease history and symptoms, 
comorbidities, therapy, hospitalisation rate and exacerbation rate were 
collected and used to characterise patients stratified by disease severity and 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) group (A-D). The 
analysis population included 2,217 individuals (55.4% male, 45.2% smokers). 
long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) as monotherapy were prescribed as 
first maintenance therapy for 40.2% of patients. ICS were prescribed as 
ICS/long-acting beta-agonists combination for 29.1% of patients or as 
monotherapy for 15.5%. ICS (alone or in combination) were prescribed to >40% of 
patients in each GOLD group. ICS-containing regimens were prescribed to patients 
with a history of pneumonia and comorbid conditions for whom the risks of ICS 
therapy may outweigh the benefits. The clinical reality of prescribing indicates 
that ICS are often prescribed outside current guideline recommendations for many 
patients newly diagnosed with COPD in the UK. Encouragingly, LAMAs are 
increasingly being prescribed as first maintenance therapy for these patients.

DOI: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2016.61
PMCID: PMC5093405
PMID: 27808096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DP has acted as a consultant for Almirall, 
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Meda, 
Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer and Teva. He has received research grants 
from the UK National Health Service, the British Lung Foundation, Aerocrine, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Eli Lilly, GSK, Meda, Merck, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Orion, Pfizer, Respiratory Effectiveness Group, Takeda, 
Teva and Zentiva. He owns shares in AKL Ltd, which produced phytopharmaceuticals 
and owns 80% of RiRL Ltd and its subsidiary social enterprise Optimum Patient 
Care. He has received unrestricted funding for investigator-initiated studies 
from Aerocrine, AKL Ltd, Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Meda, 
Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Orion, Takeda, Teva and Zentiva. MM has received 
speaker fees from Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, 
Esteve, GSK, Menarini, Grifols, Mycomed and Novartis, and has received 
consulting fees from Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer, GSK, Gebro Pharma, 
CLS Behring, MedImmune, Novartis, Grifols and Nycomed. In the last 5 years, IP 
has received speaker’s honoraria for speaking at sponsored meetings from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Aerocrine, Almirall, Novartis and GSK, and a 
payment for organising an educational event for SPRs from AstraZeneca. He has 
received honoraria for attending advisory panels with Almirall, Genentech, 
Regeneron, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Merck Sharp and Dohme (MSD), 
Schering-Plough, Novartis, Dey, Napp and Respivert. He has received sponsorship 
to attend international scientific meetings from Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, 
AstraZeneca and Napp. Neither MT nor any member of his close family has any 
shares in pharmaceutical companies. In the last 3 years he has received 
speaker’s honoraria for speaking at sponsored meetings or satellite symposia at 
conferences from the following companies marketing respiratory and allergy 
products: Aerocrine, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, MSD and Teva. He 
has received honoraria for attending advisory panels with Aerocrine, Almirall, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, MSD and Novartis. He has 
received sponsorship to attend international scientific meetings from GSK, 
AstraZeneca and Mundipharma. He has received funding for research projects from 
GSK and Almirall. He is chief medical adviser to the charity Asthma UK, a member 
of the BTS SIGN Asthma guideline group and the NICE Asthma guideline group. JW 
has received research grants from GSK, Takeda, Almirall, Novartis, Johnson and 
Johnson and Vifor Pharma, honoraria for advisory boards for Almirall, Novartis, 
GSK, Boehringer, Takeda, Johnson and Johnson, Napp, Pfizer and AstraZeneca, and 
lecture/presentation fees from Almirall, Novartis, GSK, Boehringer and Takeda. 
JH has received reimbursement for attending symposia, fees for speaking, 
organising educational events, funds for research or fees for consulting from 
Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, GSK, MSD, 
Mundipharma, Novartis and Teva. KB and DW were employees of RiRL Ltd at the time 
of the study.


159. Manag Care. 2018 May;27(5):40-47.

Characteristics and health care resource use of subjects with COPD in the year 
before initiating LAMA monotherapy or LAMA+LABA combination therapy: A U.S. 
database study.

Nagar S(1), Patel J(1), Stanford RH(1).

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline.

PURPOSE: To characterize subjects with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) newly initiated on long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) or dual 
LAMA/long-acting beta-adrenergic agonist (LABA) therapy.
DESIGN: This pilot/preliminary analysis was a retrospective crosssectional study 
of subjects with COPD from the Optum Impact National Managed Care Benchmark 
Database.
METHODOLOGY: Subjects with at least one LAMA prescription in the index period 
(July 2008-June 2009) were included and stratified by treatment. Data were 
collected in the year before the index date and included comorbidities, 
medication use, COPD-related costs, health care resource use, and exacerbations.
RESULTS: Of 5,311 eligible subjects, 2,057 initiated LAMA therapy (LAMA cohort) 
and 191 initiated LAMA+LABA therapy (LAMA+LABA cohort). The Charlson comorbidity 
index was slightly lower in the LAMA+LABA cohort than the LAMA cohort (mean±SD: 
0.63±1.13 vs. 0.66±1.28), but the number of prescriptions was higher (mean±SD: 
42.9±23.2 vs. 30.5±27.2). The LAMA+LABA cohort had higher short-acting inhaled 
beta agonist (56.0% vs. 35.7%), oral corticosteroid (37.7% vs. 32.6%), and home 
oxygen therapy use (14.1% vs. 3.2%) than the LAMA cohort. Total medical costs 
were greater in the LAMA+LABA cohort than the LAMA cohort (mean±SD: 
$3,320.40±4085.9 vs. $1,226.20±3602.9), although emergency department 
($11.00±66.8 vs. $30.70±259.2) and outpatient visit ($39.60±163.1 vs. 
$41.70±424.3) costs were lower. Resource use and exacerbation incidence were 
similar between cohorts.
CONCLUSION: In this first look, subjects with COPD initiating LAMA or LAMA+LABA 
therapy exhibited different clinical and resource use characteristics in the 
year before treatment. Subjects receiving LAMA+LABA were older, with higher COPD 
co-medication use, more prescriptions, and associated higher pharmacy costs 
compared with subjects initiating LAMA. These differences may reflect a higher 
severity of COPD in those starting LABA+LAMA treatment.

PMID: 29763411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 May 11;13:1545-1556. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S154097. eCollection 2018.

Respiratory medication used in COPD patients from seven Latin American 
countries: the LASSYC study.

Casas A(1), Montes de Oca M(2), Menezes AM(3), Wehrmeister FC(3), Lopez Varela 
MV(4), Mendoza L(5), Ramírez L(6), Miravitlles M(7).

Author information:
(1)Fundación Neumológica Colombiana, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(3)Federal University of Pelotas, Pelotas, Brazil.
(4)Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(5)Hospital Clínico Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile.
(6)AstraZeneca, San José, Costa Rica.
(7)Department of Pneumology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 18;14:241.

BACKGROUND: Limited information is available regarding medication use in COPD 
patients from Latin America. This study evaluated the type of medication used 
and the adherence to different inhaled treatments in stable COPD patients from 
the Latin American region.
METHODS: This was an observational, cross-sectional, multinational, and 
multicenter study in COPD patients attended by specialist doctors from seven 
Latin American countries. Adherence to inhaled therapy was assessed using the 
Test of Adherence to Inhalers (TAI) questionnaire. The type of medication was 
assessed as: short-acting β-agonist (SABA) or short-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(SAMA) only, long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), long-acting β-agonist 
(LABA), LABA/LAMA, inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), ICS/LABA, ICS/LAMA/LABA, or 
other.
RESULTS: In total, 795 patients were included (59.6% male), with a mean age of 
69.5±8.7 years and post-bronchodilator FEV1 of 50.0%±18.6%. The ICS/LAMA/LABA 
(32.9%) and ICS/LABA (27.7%) combinations were the most common medications used, 
followed by LABA/LAMA (11.3%), SABA or SAMA (7.9%), LABA (6.4%), LAMA (5.8%), 
and ICS (4.3%). The types of medication most commonly used in each Global 
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2013 category were 
ICS/LABA (A: 32.7%; B: 19.8%; C: 25.7%; D: 28.2%) and ICS/LAMA/LABA (A: 17.3%; 
B: 30.2%; C: 33%; D: 41.1%). The use of long-acting bronchodilators showed the 
highest adherence (good or high adherence >50%) according to the TAI 
questionnaire.
CONCLUSION: COPD management in specialist practice in Latin America does not 
follow the current guideline recommendations and there is an overuse of ICSs in 
patients with COPD from this region. Treatment regimens including the use of 
long-acting bronchodilators are associated with the highest adherence.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S154097
PMCID: PMC5955011
PMID: 29785104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure AM has been paid for her work as a 
statistician for the LASSYC study. LR is an employee of AstraZeneca. The other 
authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.


161. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2017 Jan 23;42(247):5-12.

[New bronchodilation treatment options for patients with COPD].

[Article in Polish]

Płusa T(1).

Author information:
(1)EMC Medical Institute SA - Department of Internal Medicine and Lung Disease, 
Hospital st. Anna in Piaseczno, Poland.

The main aim of treatment of patients with symptoms of airway obstruction is to 
improve their quality of life by reducing or removing the main symptoms. To get 
this effect, you must be able to control the bronchial smooth muscle. This is 
becoming more possible by the introduction of new inhaled particles, which 
acting beta-adrenergic receptors or muscarinic receptors dilate bronchial lumen. 
New drugs to control beta-adrenergic receptors exhibit a long duration of action - 
LABA (long-acting beta-agonist), for example indacaterol, vilanterol or 
olodaterol can be used once a day, because their action exceeds 24 hours. 
Similarly, new anticholinergic particles - LAMA (long acting muscarinic 
antagonist), for example. tiotropium, glycopyrronium, aclidinium, umeclidinium - 
also exert their activity by 12-24 hours. Combined preparates LAMA-LABA 
represent a further significant advance in the treatment, as provided in this 
form tend to perform better than used alone. In turn, the new bi-functional 
molecule (dual pharmacophore), which discloses a dual effect by bronchodilating 
effects by antagonists at muscarinic receptors and agonists at beta- adrenergic 
receptors, was described as MABA (muscarinic antagonist and beta agonist). The 
complementary nature of the two receptors was used in construction of this 
particle. It is expected that the introduction of this new therapy will allow 
more effective control of airflow obstruction in patients with COPD.

PMID: 28134225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Aug 3;12:2307-2312. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S89482. eCollection 2017.

Spotlight on glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate inhalation aerosol in the 
management of COPD: design, development, and place in therapy.

Dhungana S(1), Criner GJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Temple Lung Center, Lewis Katz 
School of Medicine at Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of the treatment of COPD. With the 
advent of several combination inhalers with long-acting antimuscarinic agents 
(LAMAs) and long acting beta agonists (LABAs), the choice of therapy in the 
treatment of COPD has been ever expanding. With the focus of COPD management 
shifting from FEV1-based treatment escalation to symptoms and risk-based 
treatment, we are seeing a paradigm shift in COPD treatment with early 
introduction of LAMA-LABA combination as a single inhaler. 
Glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate fixed-dose combination formulated in a 
familiar metered-dose inhaler format using proprietary co-suspension technology 
is a new option on the market. We purport to discuss the evidence behind the 
approval of the drug combination and its place in therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S89482
PMCID: PMC5546727
PMID: 28814858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


163. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Dec 30;12:141-168. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S116719. eCollection 2017.

Dual bronchodilation in COPD: lung function and patient-reported outcomes - a 
review.

Price D(1), Østrem A(2), Thomas M(3), Welte T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Primary Care Respiratory Medicine, Division of Applied Health 
Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK; Observational and Pragmatic 
Research Institute, Singapore.
(2)Gransdalen Legesenter, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Primary Care Research, University of Southampton, Southampton, 
UK.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Several fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of long-acting bronchodilators (a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist [LAMA] plus a long-acting beta-agonist [LABA]) 
are available for the treatment of COPD. Studies of these FDCs have demonstrated 
substantial improvements in lung function (forced expiratory volume in 1 second) 
in comparison with their respective constituent monocomponents. Improvements in 
patient-reported outcomes (PROs), such as symptoms and health status, as well as 
exacerbation rates, have been reported compared with a LABA or LAMA alone, but 
results are less consistent. The inconsistencies may in part be owing to 
differences in study design, methods used to assess study end points, and 
patient populations. Nevertheless, these observations tend to support an 
association between improvements in forced expiratory volume in 1 second and 
improvements in symptom-based outcomes. In order to assess the effects of FDCs 
on PROs and evaluate relationships between PROs and changes in lung function, we 
performed a systematic literature search of publications reporting randomized 
controlled trials of FDCs. Results of this literature search were independently 
assessed by two reviewers, with a third reviewer resolving any conflicting 
results. In total, 22 Phase III randomized controlled trials of FDC 
bronchodilators in COPD were identified, with an additional study including a 
post-literature search (ten for indacaterol-glycopyrronium once daily, eight for 
umeclidinium-vilanterol once daily, three for tiotropium-olodaterol once daily, 
and two for aclidinium-formoterol twice daily). Results from these studies 
demonstrated that the LAMA-LABA FDCs significantly improved lung function 
compared with their component monotherapies or other single-agent treatments. 
Furthermore, LABA-LAMA combinations also generally improved symptoms and health 
status versus monotherapies, although some discrepancies between lung function 
and PROs were observed. Overall, the safety profiles of the FDCs were similar to 
placebo. Further research is required to examine more closely any relationship 
between lung function and PROs in patients receiving LABA-LAMA combinations.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S116719
PMCID: PMC5221557
PMID: 28115839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DisclosureAØ has received payment for 
lectures/speaking from Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Meda, Sandoz, and 
Pfizer. He has advisory board membership with Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and 
Teva. DP has board membership with Aerocrine, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, and Teva Pharmaceuticals; 
consultancy agreements with Almirall, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmith Kline, Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals, and Theravance; grants and unrestricted funding for 
investigator-initiated studies (conducted through Observational and Pragmatic 
Research Institute Pte Ltd) from UK National Health Service, British Lung 
Foundation, Aero-crine, AKL Ltd, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Respiratory Effectiveness Group, 
Takeda, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Zentiva, and Theravance; payment for 
lectures/speaking engagements from Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Cipla, GlaxoSmithKline, Kyorin, Meda, Merck, Mundipharma, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Skyepharma, Takeda, and Teva Pharmaceuticals; payment for manuscript 
preparation from Mundipharma and Teva Pharmaceuticals; payment for the 
development of educational materials from Novartis and Mundipharma; payment for 
travel/accommodation/meeting expenses from Aerocrine, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Teva Pharmaceuticals, and AstraZeneca; funding for 
patient enrolment or completion of research from Chiesi, Teva Pharmaceuticals, 
Zentiva, and Novartis; stock/stock options from AKL Ltd which produces 
phytopharmaceuticals; owns 74% of the social enterprise Optimum Patient Care 
Ltd, UK and 74% of Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd, 
Singapore; and is peer reviewer for grant committees of the Medical Research 
Council, Efficacy and Mechanism Evaluation programme, and HTA. Neither MT nor 
any member of his close family has any shares in pharmaceutical companies. In 
the last 3 years, he has received honoraria for speaking at sponsored meetings 
or satellite symposia at conferences from the following companies marketing 
respiratory and allergy products: Aerocrine, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline and Teva. MT has received honoraria for attending 
advisory panels with Aero-crine, Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, MSD, and Novartis. He has received sponsorship to 
attend international scientific meetings from AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and 
Mundipharma; and has received funding for research projects from Almirall and 
GlaxoSmithKline. Neither TW nor his close family members have any shares in 
pharmaceutical companies. In the last 3 years, TW has received honoraria for 
speaking at sponsored meetings or satellite symposia at conferences from the 
following companies marketing respiratory and allergy products: Almirall, Astra 
Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Mundipharma, Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, 
and Teva. He has received honoraria for attending advisory panels with Astra 
Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, MSD, and Novartis, as well as receiving 
funding for research projects from Novartis. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


164. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2015;14(11):1759-72. doi: 10.1517/14740338.2015.1093621. 
Epub 2015 Sep 24.

The safety of anticholinergic bronchodilators for the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Tashkin DP(1).

Author information:
(1)a Professor of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles - Medicine, 
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , 10833 Le Conte Ave, Los Angeles, 
California 90095, USA +1 31 08 25 31 63 ; +1 31 02 06 50 88 ; 
dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Poorly absorbable quaternary ammonium-inhaled muscarinic 
antagonists both as the short-acting ipratropium and as long-acting (12 - 24 h) 
agents (tiotropium, glycopyrronium, aclidinium and umeclidinium) have all 
demonstrated statistically and clinically significant efficacy in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease compared with placebo. However, controversy has 
arisen concerning the safety of this class of agents principally regarding their 
association with both fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular toxicity.
AREAS COVERED: The safety of both ipratropium and the long acting muscarinic 
antagonists is reviewed with a major emphasis on potential cardiovascular 
toxicity, based on published clinical trials data and results of analyses of 
pooled data, meta-analyses, and observational studies. Since glycopyrronium, 
aclidinium, and umeclidinium have become available only relatively recently, 
more emphasis will be placed on the more extensive literature concerning the 
safety of the older anticholinergic compounds, the short-acting ipratropium, and 
the long-acting tiotropium in its dry powder formulation, as well as its newer 
soft mist inhaler delivery device.
EXPERT OPINION: Pooled analyses and meta-analyses of randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs) of tiotropium in both its dry powder and soft mist formulations, 
as well as some observational studies, have implicated this agent as increasing 
the risk of nonfatal and fatal cardiovascular events. However, the most robust 
evidence based on large-scale randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of relatively 
long duration specifically designed to evaluate the cardiovascular safety of 
tiotropium have not confirmed these safety concerns. Because of the relatively 
limited amount of safety data for the newer long acting muscarinic antagonists 
compared to the far more extensive experience with tiotropium, it will be 
important to accumulate additional safety information from post-marketing 
pharmacovigilance for these newer agents.

DOI: 10.1517/14740338.2015.1093621
PMID: 26401729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2018 Jan-Dec;12:1753466618772750. doi: 
10.1177/1753466618772750.

Real-world outcomes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
initiating long-acting mono bronchodilator therapy.

Bengtson LGS(1), DePietro M(2), McPheeters J(3), Fox KM(2).

Author information:
(1)Optum, Eden Prairie, 11000 Optum Circle, Eden Prairie, MN 55344, USA.
(2)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(3)Optum, Eden Prairie, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Randomized clinical trials have shown long-acting mono 
bronchodilator therapy to be efficacious in improving lung function and dyspnea, 
while reducing exacerbations; however, less is known regarding the effectiveness 
in routine clinical practice. This study examined treatment patterns, rescue 
medication use, healthcare resource utilization and costs, and exacerbations in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who initiated 
long-acting mono bronchodilator therapy in real-world settings.
METHODS: This retrospective study used US claims data from adult patients with 
COPD initiating long-acting mono bronchodilator therapy between 1 January 2008 
and 31 January 2015. Patients were required to have continuous health plan 
enrollment 12 months prior to (baseline period) and 12 months following therapy 
initiation (follow-up period). Outcomes, including treatment patterns, rescue 
medication use, exacerbations, and healthcare utilization and costs, were 
measured until the earliest of treatment augmentation or discontinuation, death, 
health plan disenrollment, or the end of the study period. Results were analyzed 
descriptively for all measures. Baseline and follow-up measures of all-cause and 
COPD-related healthcare costs and exacerbations [per patient per month (PPPM)] 
were compared using paired t tests.
RESULTS: Among 27,394 patients with a mean follow up of 6.3 months, 18.2% 
augmented, 74.2% discontinued, and 7.6% continued long-acting mono 
bronchodilator therapy. Rescue medication use was prevalent during the follow-up 
period, with an average of 1.0 short-acting β agonist (SABA) fills/month and 0.8 
short-acting muscarinic antagonist (SAMA) fills/month, among patients with at 
least one fill for the medication of interest. PPPM mean number of exacerbations 
was more than triple (0.17 versus 0.05, p < 0.001) and PPPM exacerbation-related 
costs were more than double over the follow-up period compared with baseline 
($1070 versus $485). COPD-related costs accounted for 50% of all-cause costs 
during the follow-up period and were significantly higher compared with baseline 
($1206 versus $592, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients initiating long-acting mono bronchodilator therapy had 
high rates of medication discontinuation or augmentation. Patients used more 
rescue medications and experienced significantly more COPD exacerbations with 
higher healthcare costs compared with baseline. Further research is warranted to 
determine whether more aggressive initial therapy would result in symptom 
improvement.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466618772750
PMCID: PMC5961922
PMID: 29737943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: LB and JM are 
employees of Optum, and were funded by AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals to conduct 
the study. MD was an employee of AstraZeneca and KF was a contractor with 
AstraZeneca during the time the study was conducted.


166. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2018 Dec;53:68-77. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.09.001. Epub 
2018 Sep 5.

Pharmacological approach and adherence to treatment recommendations in 
frequently and non-frequently exacerbating COPD patients from Italy: MISTRAL - 
The prospective cohort, observational study.

Scalone G(1), Nava S(2), Ventrella F(3), Bussoli G(4), Catapano GA(5), Pennisi 
A(6), Dadduzio F(7), Schino P(8), Pela R(9), Bartezaghi M(10), Morini P(11), 
Porpiglia PA(12), Muscianisi E(13); Mistral study group.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Pathophysiology Service - House of Health, Chiaravalle C.le (CZ), 
Italy. Electronic address: ginoscalone@libro.it.
(2)Alma Mater University, Dept of Clinical, Integrated and Experimental Medicine 
(DIMES), Respiratory and Critical Care Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, 
Bologna, Italy. Electronic address: stefanava@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine - G.Tatarella Hospital, Cerignola, Foggia, 
Italy. Electronic address: f.ventrella@tiscali.it.
(4)Pneumology Service at Cittadella Socio-sanitaria- Cavarzere, Venice, Italy. 
Electronic address: gbussoli@ferraraonline.it.
(5)Pneumology Unit, G. Monasterio Tuscany Foundation/National Research Council, 
Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: catapanog@ftgm.it.
(6)Respiratory Service Phisiopatology Rehab Center, Monsignor Goose, Calaciura, 
Biancavilla, Catania, Italy. Electronic address: apennisi.pneumo@gmail.com.
(7)UO Territorial Pneumology - ASL BT, Barletta, Italy. Electronic address: 
dadduzio.francesco@gmail.com.
(8)UO Pulmonary Fisiopathology, Miulli General Hospital, Acquaviva delle Fonti 
(BA), Italy. Electronic address: pieschin@tiscali.it.
(9)Pneumology Unit, C. e G. Mazzoni Hospital, Ascoli Piceno, Italy. Electronic 
address: pelariccardo@libero.it.
(10)Novartis Farma, Origgio, Italy. Electronic address: 
marta.bartezaghi@novartis.com.
(11)Novartis Farma, Origgio, Italy. Electronic address: 
paolo.morini@novartis.com.
(12)Novartis Farma, Origgio, Italy. Electronic address: 
alberto.porpiglia@novartis.com.
(13)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. Electronic 
address: elisa.muscianisi@novartis.com.

Several documents and guidelines provide recommendations for effective 
management of COPD patients. However, there is often a significant imbalance 
between recommended treatment of COPD patients and the actual care provided both 
in primary care and specialty setting. This imbalance could result in a 
significant negative impact on patients' health status and quality of life, 
leading to increased hospitalisations and health resource utilisation in COPD 
patients METHODS: MISTRAL was an observational, longitudinal, prospective cohort 
study, designed to assess the overall pharmacological approach of COPD in 
routine clinical practice in Italy. Eligible patients were divided into two 
cohorts based on their exacerbation history in the year prior to the enrolment, 
frequent exacerbators (FEs; ≥2 exacerbations), and non-frequent exacerbators 
(NFEs; ≤1 exacerbation). The primary objective was to assess adherence to Global 
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2011 treatment 
recommendations in FEs and NFEs at baseline and follow-up visits RESULTS: Of the 
1489 enrolled patients, 1468 (98.6%; FEs, 526; NFEs, 942) were considered 
evaluable for analyses. At baseline, 57.8% of patients were treated according to 
GOLD 2011 recommendations; a greater proportion of FEs were treated according to 
GOLD recommendations, compared with NFEs patients at baseline (77.1% versus 
46.7%; P < 0.0001), and all study visits. At baseline, GOLD group D patients 
were the most adherent (81.2%) to treatment recommendations, while group A 
patients were the least adherent (30.3%) at baseline, attributed mainly to 
overuse of inhaled corticosteroids in less severe GOLD groups. Triple therapy 
with long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) + long-acting beta-agonist/inhaled 
corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) was the most frequent prescribed treatment at all 
study visits, irrespective of patient's exacerbation history. Changes in 
treatment were more frequent in FEs versus NFEs CONCLUSIONS: The Mistral study 
reports a scarce adherence to the GOLD 2011 treatment recommendations in routine 
clinical practice in Italy. The adherence was particularly low in less severe, 
non-frequent exacerbating patients mostly for ICS overuse, and was higher in 
high-risk, frequent exacerbating COPD patients.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.09.001
PMID: 30193866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Drugs. 2019 Jun;79(9):997-1008. doi: 10.1007/s40265-019-01133-w.

Tiotropium/Olodaterol: A Review in COPD.

Blair HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand. demail@springer.com.

Erratum in
    Drugs. 2019 Jul 18;:

Tiotropium/olodaterol (Stiolto® Respimat®; Spiolto® Respimat®) is an inhaled 
fixed-dose combination of the long acting muscarinic antagonist tiotropium 
bromide (hereafter referred to as tiotropium) and the long-acting beta-adrenergic 
agonist olodaterol. It is available in several countries, including the USA, 
Japan, China and those of the EU, where it is indicated for the long-term 
maintenance treatment of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). The efficacy of tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg/day in patients with COPD 
was evaluated in phase III or IV trials of 6-52 weeks' duration. 
Tiotropium/olodaterol improved lung function to a greater extent than each of 
its individual components or placebo in 12- and 52-week trials. In 6-week 
trials, tiotropium/olodaterol provided greater lung function benefits over 24 h 
than the individual components, placebo or twice-daily fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol. Tiotropium/olodaterol also demonstrated beneficial 
effects on health-related quality of life (HR-QoL), dyspnoea, inspiratory 
capacity, exercise endurance and the need for rescue medication. In an 8-week 
open-label trial, umeclidinium/vilanterol was superior to tiotropium/olodaterol 
for the primary endpoint of trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s. The 
tolerability profile of tiotropium/olodaterol was generally similar to that of 
the individual components. In conclusion, tiotropium/olodaterol provides a 
useful option for the maintenance treatment of COPD, with the convenience of 
once-daily administration via a single inhaler.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-019-01133-w
PMCID: PMC6647411
PMID: 31119643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Hannah Blair is a salaried employee of Adis 
International Ltd/Springer Nature, is responsible for the article content and 
declares no relevant conflicts of interest.


168. Int J Qual Health Care. 2018 Jun 1;30(5):351-357. doi: 10.1093/intqhc/mzy014.

Quality of care and clinical outcomes of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
in patients with schizophrenia. A Danish nationwide study.

Jørgensen M(1), Mainz J(1)(2), Lange P(3), Paaske Johnsen S(4).

Author information:
(1)Aalborg University Hospital, Psychiatry, Mølleparkvej 10, Aalborg, Denmark.
(2)Department of Community Mental Health, The University of Haifa, 199 Aba 
Khoushy Ave., Mount Carmel, Haifa, Israel.
(3)Medical Department, Respiratory Section, Herlev Hospital, University of 
Copenhagen, Herlev Ringvej 75, Herlev, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University and Aalborg University 
Hospital, Søndre Skovvej 15, Aalborg, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between schizophrenia and the quality of 
care and clinical outcomes of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DESIGN: A Danish nationwide population-based cohort study using comprehensive 
information from Danish registries between 2008 and 2013.
SETTING: Public Danish hospitals.
PARTICIPANTS: 72 692 COPD patients with hospital contacts including 621 with 
schizophrenia.
INTERVENTION: COPD care.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The quality of COPD care was defined as meeting 
guideline-recommended process performance measures of care. Potential predictors 
of COPD care among patients with schizophrenia included patient- (sex, age, 
alcohol or drug abuse, Global Assessment of Functioning score, duration of 
schizophrenia), provider- (quality of schizophrenia care), and system-related 
factors (contact-volume defined as hospital department and clinics' annual 
average contact volume of COPD patients). Clinical outcomes included 30-day 
all-cause readmission and 30-day all-cause mortality risk following an admission 
for exacerbation of COPD.
RESULTS: Compared to COPD patients without schizophrenia, COPD patients with 
schizophrenia had a lower chance of receiving treatment with long-acting 
muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) or long-acting beta-agonists (LABA) (Relative risk 
(RR) 0.92, 95% CI: 0.87-0.98). Female sex was associated with a higher chance of 
receiving LAMA/LABA treatment among COPD patients with schizophrenia. COPD 
patients with schizophrenia had a higher risk of 30-day mortality (adjusted odds 
ratio (OR) 1.27, 95% CI: 1.01-1.59) but not a higher risk of readmission 
compared with COPD patients without schizophrenia.
CONCLUSIONS: COPD patients with schizophrenia had a slightly lower chance of 
receiving LAMA/LABA treatment, but a substantially increased risk of death 
following admission for an exacerbation compared with patients without 
schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1093/intqhc/mzy014
PMID: 29432585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2018 Feb;19(3):287-289. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2017.1419186. Epub 2017 Dec 22.

Triple fixed inhaled therapy in frequent chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
exacerbators: potential advantages for various degrees of airways obstruction.

Antohe I(1), Antoniu SA(1), Gavrilovici C(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department Medicine II-Nursing , University of Medicine and Pharmacy 
Grigore T Popa , Iasi , Romania.
(2)b Department Medicine III-Bioethics , University of Medicine and Pharmacy 
Grigore T Popa , Iasi , Romania.

Inhaled therapies are the therapeutic mainstay in stable chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). They are represented by long-acting bronchodilators 
(anticholinergics or beta2-agonists) and by inhaled corticosteroids, currently 
available as a monotherapy or as combination therapies in one inhaler. 
Combinations of anticholinergics and beta2 agonists or beta2 agonists and 
inhaled corticosteroids are widely used per the prescription guidelines. The 
advantage of them are related with higher adherence and better acceptability by 
the patients as compared to both components dosed with individual inhalers. 
Bronchodilator combinations have also been demonstrated to exhibit a superior 
efficacy due to their synergistic mechanism of action when compared to either 
monotherapy. Triple therapies with anticholinergic-beta2 agonist-inhaled 
corticosteroid have been under investigation over the last few years and 
recently one such product became available in the EU for the treatment of stable 
COPD. Areas covered: The the FULFIL trial (Lung FUnction and quality of LiFe 
assessment in COPD with closed trIpLe therapy) investigated the efficacy and 
safety of fluticasone/vilanterol/umeclidinium once daily therapy in COPD 
patients. Expert opinion: The results discussed in this paper support the use of 
this combination in advanced COPD but also in earlier stages in patients with 
frequent exacerbation. However further and more long-term assessments are 
required.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2017.1419186
PMID: 29271268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Mar 1;14:547-556. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S185362. eCollection 2019.

COPD patients' characteristics, usual care, and adherence to guidelines: the 
Greek UNLOCK study.

Tsiligianni I(1), Kampouraki M(2), Ierodiakonou D(3), Poulonirakis I(4), 
Papadokostakis P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Crete, 
Herkalion, Crete, Greece, i.tsiligianni@uoc.gr.
(2)Primary Care Practice, Health Center of Moires, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(3)Heraklion University Hospital, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(4)Primary Care Practice, Health Center of Agia Varvara, Heraklion, Crete, 
Greece.
(5)Primary Care Practice, Garipa, Herkalion, Crete, Greece.

PURPOSE: GOLD guidelines classify COPD patients into A-D groups based on health 
status as assessed by COPD Assessment Test (CAT) or mMRC tools and exacerbations 
and recommend single or dual long-acting bronchodilators as maintenance therapy, 
with additional inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) if the disease remains 
uncontrolled. We aimed to classify primary care COPD patients into A-D groups, 
assess usual treatment and adherence to guidelines, potential mismatches between 
CAT-and mMRC-based classification and described symptoms within groups.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 257 primary care COPD patients were enrolled 
between 2015 and 2016 in Greece. Physicians used structured interviews to 
collect cross-sectional data including demographics, symptoms, CAT, mMRC scores, 
and medications. Patients were classified into A-D groups based on CAT and mMRC, 
and prevalence of symptoms and medication was estimated within A-D groups. 
Interviews with physicians were also performed to explore additional issues 
about treatment and adherence to guidelines.
RESULTS: Mean (SD) age was 65 (12.3) years with 79% males. The majority of 
patients reported uncontrolled symptoms (91% and 61% with ≥10 CAT or ≥2 mMRC 
scores, respectively). Thirty-seven percentage had $2 exacerbations in the past 
year. Group B was the largest followed by Groups D, A, and C. Patients were 
classified as more severe by CAT than by mMRC. In all groups, the majority were 
treated with combined long-acting beta agonist/ICS (> 50%). When patients were 
asked to report their main symptoms, dyspnea and cough were the most important 
symptoms mentioned, and there was a great variation between the A-D groups. 
However, Groups A-C reported mainly morning symptoms, whereas Group D suffered 
symptoms all day. Physicians reported a significant number of barriers to 
implementing guidelines, eg, frequent lack of guideline updates, access to 
diagnostic procedures, and prescription-reimbursement issues.
CONCLUSION: Our study confirms poor adherence to guidelines regarding treatment 
with an overuse of ICS and important barriers to implementation. A mismatch in 
classification occurs depending on the tool used, which can mislead clinicians 
in their choice of treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S185362
PMCID: PMC6402614
PMID: 30880944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


171. Drugs. 2019 Jan;79(1):85-91. doi: 10.1007/s40265-018-1036-x.

Revefenacin: First Global Approval.

Heo YA(1).

Author information:
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New Zealand. 
dru@adis.com.

Erratum in
    Drugs. 2019 Mar 29;:

Revefenacin (YUPELRI™) inhalation solution, a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(i.e. an anticholinergic) developed by Theravance Biopharma and Mylan, is the 
first and currently the only once-daily, nebulized bronchodilator to be approved 
in the USA for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In 
November 2018, based on results of three phase III trials, the US Food and Drug 
Administration granted market authorization to revefenacin for the maintenance 
treatment of patients with COPD. This article summarizes the milestones in the 
development of revefenacin leading to this first global approval.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-018-1036-x
PMCID: PMC6445810
PMID: 30560478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: During the peer review process the manufacturer 
of the agent under review was offered an opportunity to comment on the article. 
Changes resulting from any comments received were made by the author on the 
basis of scientific completeness and accuracy. Young-A Heo is a salaried 
employee of Adis/Springer, is responsible for the article content and declares 
no relevant conflicts of interest


172. Respir Med. 2016 Jun;115:39-45. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.03.015. Epub 2016 Mar 
22.

Long-term safety of glycopyrrolate: A randomized study in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD (GEM3).

Mahler DA(1), Gifford AH(2), Satti A(3), Jessop N(4), Eckert JH(5), D'Andrea 
P(6), Mota F(7), Banerjee R(8).

Author information:
(1)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA; Valley 
Regional Hospital, Claremont, NH 03743, USA. Electronic address: 
mahlerdonald@gmail.com.
(2)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA. Electronic 
address: alex.h.gifford@hitchcock.org.
(3)Temple University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic 
address: aditi.satti@tuhs.temple.edu.
(4)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
nicola.jessop@novartis.com.
(5)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
joerg.eckert@novartis.com.
(6)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. Electronic 
address: peter.dandrea@novartis.com.
(7)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
fernando.mota@novartis.com.
(8)Novartis Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad, India. Electronic address: 
rudrani-1.banerjee@novartis.com.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the leading 
causes of death in the United States. long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) 
are a class of medications used as maintenance therapy for COPD. The GEM3 
(Glycopyrrolate Effect on syMptoms and lung function) study assessed the 
long-term safety and efficacy of a LAMA, glycopyrrolate (GLY) 15.6 μg twice 
daily (b.i.d.), compared with an approved long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), 
indacaterol (IND) 75 μg once daily (q.d.) in patients with stable, symptomatic 
COPD with moderate-to-severe airflow limitation.
METHODS: This 52-week, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group study 
randomized patients (1:1) of the United States to receive GLY 15.6 μg b.i.d. or 
IND 75 μg q.d. both delivered via the Neohaler(®) device. The primary objective 
was to assess the safety and tolerability in terms of adverse event (AE) 
reporting rates over 52 weeks. Safety was also determined by evaluating multiple 
secondary endpoints, including vital signs, electrocardiograms (ECGs), and time 
to first moderate or severe exacerbation. Efficacy-related secondary endpoints 
included pre-dose forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and forced vital 
capacity (FVC).
RESULTS: Of the 511 randomized patients (GLY, n = 254; IND, n = 257), 81.6% 
completed the study. The overall incidences of AEs (GLY, 77.3%; IND, 77.0%) and 
serious AEs (GLY, 13.1%; IND, 13.3%) were comparable between the groups. The 
incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events was low and comparable between 
the groups. No clinically relevant differences for vital signs or ECG parameters 
were observed between the treatment groups. The three sudden deaths reported 
within 30 days of the treatment (GLY, n = 2; IND, n = 1) were adjudicated as 
unrelated to the study medication. In terms of efficacy, GLY 15.6 μg b.i.d. 
showed improvements in pre-dose FEV1 and FVC from baseline, which was comparable 
to those with IND 75 μg q.d., with no statistically significant differences. No 
significant differences were observed between the treatment groups in the time 
to first moderate or severe COPD exacerbation.
CONCLUSION: GLY 15.6 μg b.i.d. showed a long-term safety profile comparable to 
that of IND 75 μg q.d. and provided rapid and sustained bronchodilation over 52 
weeks in patients with COPD with moderate-to-severe airflow limitation.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01697696.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.03.015
PMID: 27215502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Oct 30;10:2347-56. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S88246. eCollection 2015.

Combined bronchodilators (tiotropium plus olodaterol) for patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ramadan WH(1), Kabbara WK(1), El Khoury GM(1), Al Assir SA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy, Lebanese American 
University, Byblos, Lebanon.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Lebanese American University, Byblos, Lebanon.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a respiratory disease 
characterized by a progressive decline in lung function, is considered to be a 
leading cause of morbidity and mortality. Long-acting inhaled bronchodilators, 
such as long-acting beta agonists (LABAs) or long acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMAs), are the cornerstone of maintenance therapy for patients with 
moderate-to-very-severe COPD. For patients not sufficiently controlled on a 
single long-acting bronchodilator, a combination of different bronchodilators 
has shown a significant increase in lung function. Tiotropium, a once-daily 
dosing LAMA, demonstrated sustained improvements in lung function as well as 
improved health-related quality of life, reduced exacerbations, and increased 
survival without altering the rate of decline in the mean forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) with fairly tolerable side effects. Olodaterol is a 
once-daily dosing LABA that has proven to be effective in improving lung 
function, reducing rescue medication use, and improving dyspnea and 
health-related quality of life, as well as improving exercise endurance with an 
acceptable safety profile. The combination of olodaterol and tiotropium provided 
additional improvements in lung function greater than monotherapy with each drug 
alone. Several well-designed randomized trials confirmed that the synergistic 
effect of both drugs in combination was able to improve lung function and 
health-related quality of life without a significant increase in adverse 
effects. The objective of this paper is to review available evidence on the 
clinical efficacy and safety of tiotropium, olodaterol, and their combination in 
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S88246
PMCID: PMC4634833
PMID: 26586940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Mar 24;12:997-1008. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S124420. eCollection 2017.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of umeclidinium/vilanterol for the management of 
patients with moderate to very severe COPD using an economic model.

Wilson MR(1), Patel JG(2), Coleman A(3), McDade CL(1), Stanford RH(3), Earnshaw 
SR(1).

Author information:
(1)RTI Health Solutions, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(2)GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA; Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA, USA.
(3)GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Bronchodilators such as long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) 
and long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) are central to the pharmacological 
management of COPD. Dual bronchodilation with umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI; 
62.5/25 μg) is a novel LAMA/LABA combination approved for maintenance treatment 
for patients with COPD.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the cost-effectiveness of 
maintenance treatment with UMEC/VI compared with tiotropium (TIO) 18 μg, open 
dual LAMA + LABA treatment, or no long-acting bronchodilator treatment in 
patients with moderate to very severe COPD.
METHODS: A Markov model was developed to estimate the costs and outcomes 
associated with UMEC/VI treatment in patients with moderate to very severe COPD 
(GSK study number: HO-13-13411). Clinical efficacy, costs, utilities, and 
mortality obtained from the published literature were used as the model inputs. 
Costs are presented in US dollars based on 2015 prices. The model outputs are 
total costs, drug costs, other medical costs, number of COPD exacerbations, and 
quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs). Costs and outcomes were discounted at a 3% 
annual rate. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratios were calculated. One-way and 
probabilistic sensitivity analyses were conducted to assess the effects of 
changing parameters on the uncertainty of the results.
RESULTS: UMEC/VI treatment for moderate to very severe COPD was associated with 
lower lifetime medical costs ($82,344) compared with TIO ($88,822), open dual 
LAMA + LABA treatment ($114,442), and no long-acting bronchodilator ($86,751). 
Fewer exacerbations were predicted to occur with UMEC/VI treatment compared with 
no long-acting bronchodilator treatment. UMEC/VI provided an 0.11 and 0.25 
increase in QALYs compared with TIO and no long-acting bronchodilator treatment, 
and as such, dominated these cost-effectiveness analyses. Sensitivity analyses 
confirmed that the results were robust.
CONCLUSION: The results from this model suggest that UMEC/VI treatment would be 
dominant compared with TIO and no long-acting bronchodilator treatment, and less 
costly than open dual LAMA + LABA treatment in patients with moderate to very 
severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S124420
PMCID: PMC5373831
PMID: 28392684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure MRW, CLM, and SRE are employees of 
RTI Health Solutions, an independent contract research organization that has 
received funding from GSK for this and other studies and from other 
pharmaceutical companies that market drugs for the treatment of patients with 
COPD and other medical conditions. AC and RHS are employees of GSK and holders 
of GSK stock. JGP was an employee of GSK and holder of GSK stock at the time of 
the study. JGP is now employed by Amgen. The authors report no other conflicts 
of interest in this work.


175. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Oct 18;11:2585-2596. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S114034. eCollection 2016.

A review of nebulized drug delivery in COPD.

Tashkin DP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.

Current guidelines recommend inhaled pharmacologic therapy as the preferred 
route of administration for treating COPD. Bronchodilators (beta-agonists and 
antimuscarinics) are the mainstay of pharmacologic therapy in patients with 
COPD, with long-acting agents recommended for patients with moderate to severe 
symptoms or those who are at a higher risk for COPD exacerbations. Dry powder 
inhalers and pressurized metered dose inhalers are the most commonly used drug 
delivery devices, but they may be inadequate in various clinical scenarios (eg, 
the elderly, the cognitively impaired, and hospitalized patients). As more drugs 
become available in solution formulations, patients with COPD and their 
caregivers are becoming increasingly satisfied with nebulized drug delivery, 
which provides benefits similar to drugs delivered by handheld inhalers in both 
symptom relief and improved quality of life. This article reviews recent 
innovations in nebulized drug delivery and the important role of nebulized 
therapy in the treatment of COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S114034
PMCID: PMC5076803
PMID: 27799757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Lancet Respir Med. 2016 Feb;4(2):149-64. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00518-4. 
Epub 2016 Jan 12.

Cardiac effects of current treatments of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Lahousse L(1), Verhamme KM(2), Stricker BH(3), Brusselle GG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 
Inspectorate of Healthcare, The Hague, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, Netherlands. Electronic address: guy.brusselle@ugent.be.

We review the cardiac safety of the drugs available at present for the 
maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in stable 
disease, focusing on inhaled long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) and 
long-acting beta agonists (LABA), used either as a monotherapy or as a fixed-dose 
combination. We report the difficulties of, and pitfalls in, the investigation 
of the safety of drug treatments in COPD, which is hampered by the so-called 
COPD trial paradox: on the one hand, COPD is defined as a systemic disease and 
is frequently associated with comorbidities (especially cardiovascular 
comorbidities), which have an important effect on the prognosis of individual 
patients; on the other hand, patients with COPD and cardiovascular or other 
coexisting illnesses are often excluded from participation in randomised 
controlled clinical trials. In these trials, inhaled long-acting 
bronchodilators, both LAMA or LABA, or both, seem to be safe when used in the 
appropriate dose in adherent patients with COPD without uncontrolled 
cardiovascular disease or other notable comorbidities. However, the cardiac 
safety of LAMA and LABA is less evident when used inappropriately (eg, 
overdosing) or in patients with COPD and substantial cardiovascular disease, 
prolonged QTc interval, or polypharmacy. Potential warnings about rare cardiac 
events caused by COPD treatment from meta-analyses and observational studies 
need to be confirmed in high quality large randomised controlled trials. 
Finally, we briefly cover the cardiac safety issues of chronic oral drug 
treatments for COPD, encompassing theophylline, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, 
and macrolides.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00518-4
PMID: 26794033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Respir Med. 2017 Jan;122:58-66. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.11.011. Epub 2016 Nov 
14.

Long-term general and cardiovascular safety of tiotropium/olodaterol in patients 
with moderate to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Buhl R(1), Magder S(2), Bothner U(3), Tetzlaff K(4), Voß F(3), Loaiza L(3), 
Vogelmeier CF(5), McGarvey L(6).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, Mainz, Germany. Electronic 
address: r.buhl@3-med.klinik.uni-mainz.de.
(2)Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany; Department of 
Sports Medicine, Medical Clinic V, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-University Marburg, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany.
(6)Centre for Infection and Immunity, School of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK.

BACKGROUND: Long-term safety, particularly cardiovascular safety, is of special 
interest in maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) with long-acting beta-agonists and long acting muscarinic antagonists, 
given potential cardiovascular effects.
METHODS: Two 52-week Phase III trials (TONADO®) investigated 
tiotropium/olodaterol (5/5 and 2.5/5 μg) versus tiotropium 2.5, 5 μg and 
olodaterol 5 μg. In a pre-specified safety analysis, investigator-reported 
treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs), electrocardiogram and laboratory data 
were pooled. All serious AE (SAE) reports were reviewed by an independent 
Adjudication Committee, which assessed whether deaths, hospitalisations or 
intubations were respiratory, cardiovascular, cerebrovascular or other disease 
related. Subgroup analyses investigated cardiovascular safety including major 
cardiac events in patients with cardiovascular co-morbidities.
RESULTS: This analysis comprised 3100 patients with moderate to very severe 
COPD, treated for ≤1 year, including 784 patients with cardiovascular 
co-morbidities. AEs were balanced across treatments in the total population as 
well as in patient subgroups with pre-existing cardiovascular co-morbidities. 
The incidence and nature of events were consistent with the disease under study 
and a 1-year trial duration. 494/3100 patients contributed to an adjudicated 
analysis of SAEs: 260 had respiratory-related, 53 had cardiovascular-related and 
16 had cerebrovascular-related SAEs. Incidences of these SAEs were comparable 
between treatments. There was no evidence of any increased risk for the 
combination compared to the monotherapy groups.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide confidence for clinicians that 
tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg can be safely administered once-daily to patients 
with moderate to very severe COPD long-term, including those with significant 
cardiovascular co-morbidity.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov, Nos.: NCT01431274, NCT01431287.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.11.011
PMID: 27993292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Curr Med Res Opin. 2016 May;32(5):967-73. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2016.1140029. 
Epub 2016 Feb 18.

Long-term (52 weeks) safety and tolerability of umeclidinium in Japanese 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Yamagata E(1), Soutome T(2), Hashimoto K(3), Mihara K(3), Tohda Y(4).

Author information:
(1)a Yamagata Clinic , Oita , Japan ;
(2)b Biomedical Data Sciences Department , GSK , Tokyo , Japan ;
(3)c Respiratory Medicines Development, GSK , Tokyo , Japan ;
(4)d Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology , Kinki University , 
Osaka , Japan.

Objective Umeclidinium bromide (UMEC) 62.5 μg is a long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) that is administered once daily via inhalation for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) treatment. The objective of this study was 
to evaluate the safety and tolerability of long-term treatment with UMEC 125 μg 
in Japanese patients with COPD. Methods This was a 52 week, multicenter, 
open-label study to evaluate the safety and tolerability of UMEC 125 μg once 
daily delivered via a novel dry powder inhaler (nDPI) in Japanese patients with 
COPD. The primary endpoint was the incidence and severity of all adverse events 
(AEs) throughout the 52 week treatment period. Clinical trial registration 
number ClinicalTrials.gov identifier is NCT01702363. Results A total of 153 
patients were enrolled in the study. Of these, 131 patients started treatment 
with UMEC 125 μg, and 111 patients (85%) completed the study. AEs did not differ 
greatly in incidence over the various time periods (Weeks 0 to 12, 13 to 24, 25 
to 36, and 37 to 52 of treatment) and did not increase with continued treatment. 
The incidence of drug-related AEs associated with the pharmacological effects of 
LAMAs (including constipation, blurred vision, and thirst) was low. Serious 
adverse events (SAEs) during the treatment period were reported in 17 patients 
(13%). SAEs reported in more than one patient were COPD exacerbation and 
pneumonia (3 patients each, 2%). One SAE of angina pectoris was considered to be 
drug related. No fatalities were reported during this study. Conclusions No new 
AEs were identified beyond those attributable to the pharmacological effects of 
LAMAs. UMEC 125 μg was well tolerated over 52 weeks of treatment in Japanese 
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2016.1140029
PMID: 26782971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Dec 3;10:2601-8. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S79635. 
eCollection 2015.

Switching treatments in COPD: implications for costs and treatment adherence.

Braido F(1), Lavorini F(2), Blasi F(3), Baiardini I(1), Canonica GW(1).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory and Allergy Diseases Clinic, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Genoa, IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Careggi University 
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, IRCCS Fondazione Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, 
Italy.

Inhaled therapy is key to the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). New drugs and inhalers have recently been launched or will soon 
become available, and the expiry of patent protection covering several currently 
used inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids will be accompanied by the 
development of bioequivalent, generic inhaled drugs. Consequently, a broader 
availability of branded and generic compounds will increase prescription 
opportunities. Given the time course of COPD, patients are likely to switch 
drugs and inhalers in daily practice. Switching from one device to another, if 
not accompanied by appropriate training for the patient, can be associated with 
poor clinical outcomes and increased use of health care resources. In fact, 
while it seems reasonable to prescribe generic inhaled drugs to reduce costs, 
inadequate use of inhaler devices, which is often associated with a poor 
patient-physician or patient-pharmacist relationship, is one of the most common 
reasons for failure to achieve COPD treatment outcomes. Further research is 
needed to quantify, as in asthma, the impact of inappropriate switching of 
inhalers in patients with COPD and show the outcomes related to the effect of 
using the same device for delivering inhaled medications.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S79635
PMCID: PMC4671757
PMID: 26664108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Apr 21;10:813-22. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S56067. eCollection 2015.

Role of combined indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide (QVA149) for the 
treatment of COPD in Japan.

Horita N(1), Kaneko T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

Once-daily dual-bronchodilator therapy with combined indacaterol and 
glycopyrronium bromide in one device (Ultibro, Breezhaler), often called QVA149, 
was first approved in 2013 in Japan and Europe. As of November 2014, more than 
40 countries had approved this medication except for the USA. This is the first 
dual bronchodilator in one device. Now, the Breezhaler is the only device that 
can provide long acting muscarinic antagonist (glycopyrronium bromide), 
long-acting beta agonist (indacaterol), and a combination of the two medications 
(QVA149). The choice among the three medications allows a patient to use the 
same inhalation device even when the regimen is changed from 
single-bronchodilator therapy to dual-bronchodilator therapy. In addition, the 
quick bronchodilation effect and once-daily administration can improve patient 
adherence to medical treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
To our knowledge, as of November 2014, the safety and the efficacy of QVA149 
have been evaluated in 14 randomized controlled trials. The 14 trials generally 
showed good safety profiles, and there were better or not-inferior 
bronchodilator effects of QVA149 when compared with placebo, or other inhaled 
medication. According to the Japanese Respiratory Society guidelines, QVA149 is 
a combination of the two first-line bronchodilators. Our meta-analysis indicated 
that QVA149 is superior to the salmeterol-fluticasone combination to treat COPD 
in respect of the frequency of adverse effects, exacerbation, pneumonia, and 
improvement of trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). Thus, we 
believe that QVA149 can be a key medication for COPD treatments.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S56067
PMCID: PMC4410821
PMID: 25960646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Ann Pharmacother. 2019 Mar;53(3):285-293. doi: 10.1177/1060028018798753. Epub 
2018 Sep 1.

Glycopyrrolate/eFlow CS: The First Nebulized long acting muscarinic Antagonist 
Approved to Treat Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Pleasants RA 2nd(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Duke Clinical Research Institute and Durham Veterans Administration Medical 
Center, Durham, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, efficacy, and safety of the first 
nebulized long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), glycopyrrolate (GLY)/eFlow 
closed system (CS) nebulizer, approved for maintenance treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DATA SOURCES: A PubMed search was conducted (January 2000 to July 2018) using 
the following terms/phrases: nebulized glycopyrrolate, inhalation devices in 
COPD, long acting muscarinic antagonists COPD, and COPD survey. Retrieved 
articles were reviewed to identify additional references.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Primary and review articles on GLY/eFlow CS 
and other treatment options for patients with COPD were selected.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Guidelines recommend the use of LAMAs, alone or in combination 
with long-acting beta-agonists, as maintenance therapy for the majority of 
patients with COPD. With the range of different devices and bronchodilators now 
available, treatment can be tailored based on individual needs. The eFlow CS 
nebulizer delivers GLY rapidly over a 2- to 3-minute period and provides 
bronchodilation within 30 minutes, lasting 12 hours. Phase 2 dose-finding and 
phase 3 studies demonstrated sustained statistically significant and clinically 
important improvements in pulmonary function and patient-reported outcomes with 
GLY/eFlow CS. Relevance to Patient Care and Clinical Practice: GLY/eFlow CS 
provides a novel, portable, efficient, and rapid drug delivery system.
CONCLUSIONS: The recently approved GLY/eFlow CS drug-device combination provides 
a viable treatment option for patients with COPD, particularly those with 
conditions that may impair proper use of traditional handheld inhalers.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028018798753
PMCID: PMC6357169
PMID: 30175596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author 
declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Dr Pleasants has 
received grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, and Teva, speaker 
fees from Astra-Zeneca and Sunovion, and consultant fees from Teva and 
Glaxo-SmithKline.


182. Respir Med. 2018 Dec;145:138-144. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.10.013. Epub 2018 Oct 
26.

Impact of prompt versus delayed initiation of triple therapy post COPD 
exacerbation in a US-managed care setting.

Bogart M(1), Glassberg MB(2), Reinsch T(3), Stanford RH(3).

Author information:
(1)GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.r.bogart@gsk.com.
(2)Ethicon, US Route 22, Somerville, NJ, USA.
(3)GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA; Division of 
Pharmaceutical Outcomes and Policy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: It is unknown whether there is a benefit to initiating triple 
therapy (TT; inhaled corticosteroids combined with long-acting beta-agonists and 
long acting muscarinic antagonists) promptly (within 30 days) following a 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)-related hospitalization or 
emergency-department (ED) visit compared with delaying treatment (31-180 days).
METHODS: This retrospective, observational study (GSK: HO-15-15256) used 
healthcare claims from a commercial and Medicare claims database (January 1, 
2008-December 31, 2015).
PATIENTS: ≥40 years of age, diagnosed with COPD and no history of TT 12 months 
pre-index. Patients experiencing a COPD-related hospitalization or ED visit 
(index) who initiated TT ≤ 6 months following index were included (January 1, 
2009-December 31, 2014). Patients initiating TT ≤ 30 or 31-180 days following 
index were included in the Prompt or Delayed cohorts, respectively. All-cause 
and COPD-related costs (total, medical and prescription), and exacerbations 
(severe and moderate) per patient per year were determined for 12 months post 
index. Outcomes were adjusted by cohort, weighted for a balanced distribution of 
baseline covariates between cohorts using inverse probability weights.
RESULTS: Overall, 10,902 patients were identified (Prompt: n = 5701; Delayed: 
n = 5201). Total, medical and prescription all-cause costs were significantly 
higher in the Delayed versus Prompt cohorts (percent increase: 18.7%, 22.8% and 
8.8%, respectively; all p < 0.0001). COPD-related total, medical and 
prescription costs were 49.3%, 66.3% and 10.3% higher in the Delayed versus 
Prompt cohorts, respectively (all p < 0.0001). Total and severe COPD-related 
exacerbation rates were 28.2% and 64.7% higher in the Delayed versus Prompt 
cohorts (p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: Prompt use of TT following a COPD-inpatient or ED visit may reduce 
future costs and subsequent exacerbations compared with delaying the initiation 
of TT.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.10.013
PMID: 30509702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2018 Jan-Dec;12:1753466618760779. doi: 
10.1177/1753466618760779.

Single-inhaler triple therapy utilizing the once-daily combination of 
fluticasone furoate, umeclidinium and vilanterol in the management of COPD: the 
current evidence base and future prospects.

Malerba M(1), Nardin M(2), Santini G(3), Mores N(3), Radaeli A(4), Montuschi 
P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine-Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Piemonte Orientale, Novara/Vercelli, Italy.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Agostino 
Gemelli University Hospital Foundation, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, ASST Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of the 
Sacred Heart, Agostino Gemelli, University Hospital Foundation, Largo Francesco 
Vito, 1 - 00168, Rome, Italy.

Maintenance pharmacological treatment for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) is based on inhaled drugs, including long acting muscarinic 
receptor antagonists (LAMA), long-acting beta-adrenoceptor agonists (LABA) and 
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). Inhaled pharmacological treatment can improve 
patients' daily symptoms and reduce decline of pulmonary function and acute 
exacerbation rate. Treatment with all three inhaled drug classes is reserved for 
selected, more severe, patients with COPD when symptoms are not sufficiently 
controlled by dual LABA/LAMA therapy and exacerbations are frequent. This review 
focuses on the role of single-inhaler triple therapy with once-daily fluticasone 
furoate/umeclidinium/vilanterol fixed-dose combination, which is in phase III 
clinical development for maintenance treatment of severe-to-very severe COPD. In 
this review, we summarize evidence providing the rationale for its use in COPD 
and discuss the gaps to be filled in this pharmacotherapeutic area.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466618760779
PMCID: PMC5941662
PMID: 29537340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.


184. Respir Med. 2016 Jul;116:100-6. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.05.011. Epub 2016 May 
12.

Overuse of short-acting beta-agonist bronchodilators in COPD during periods of 
clinical stability.

Fan VS(1), Gylys-Colwell I(2), Locke E(2), Sumino K(3), Nguyen HQ(4), Thomas 
RM(2), Magzamen S(5).

Author information:
(1)VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA; University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: vincent.fan@va.gov.
(2)VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Saint Louis VA Medical Center, St. Louis, MO, USA; Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Research & Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, 
Pasadena, CA, USA.
(5)Environmental and Radiological Health Sciences, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, CO, USA.

BACKGROUND: Overuse of short-acting beta-agonists (SABA) is described in asthma, 
but little is known about overuse of SABA in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD).
METHODS: Prospective 3-month cohort study of patients with moderate-to-severe 
COPD who were provided a portable electronic inhaler sensor to monitor daily 
SABA use. Subjects wore a pedometer for 3 seven-day periods and were asked to 
complete a daily diary of symptoms and inhaler use. Overuse was defined as >8 
actuations of their SABA per day while clinically stable.
RESULTS: Among 32 participants, 15 overused their SABA inhaler at least once 
(mean 8.6 ± 5.0 puffs/day), and 6 overused their inhaler more than 50% of 
monitored days. Compared to those with no overuse, overusers had greater dyspnea 
(modified Medical Research Council Dyspnea Scale: 2.7 vs. 1.9, p = 0.02), were 
more likely to use home oxygen (67% vs. 29%, p = 0.04), and were more likely to 
be on maximal inhaled therapy (long-acting beta-agonist, long-acting 
antimuscarinic agent, and an inhaled steroid: 40% vs. 6%, p = 0.03), and most 
had completed pulmonary rehabilitation (67% vs. 0%, p < 0.001). However, 27% of 
overusers of SABA were not on guideline-concordant COPD therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Overuse of SABA was common and associated with increased disease 
severity and symptoms, even though overusers were on more COPD-related inhalers 
and more had completed pulmonary rehabilitation. More research is needed to 
understand factors associated with inhaler overuse and how to improve correct 
inhaler use.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.05.011
PMID: 27296828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Postgrad Med. 2015;127(7):771-80. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2015.1080589. Epub 2015 
Aug 19.

Bronchodilators, receptors and cross-talk: Together is better?

Panettieri RA Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)a University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine , Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.

The most widely used maintenance therapies in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) are long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), and a number of 
these drugs are now available in combination with long-acting beta-agonists 
(LABAs). LAMAs inhibit the parasympathetic muscarinic pathway, while LABAs, as 
sympathomimetics, reduce airway smooth muscle (ASM) tone. As well as directly 
controlling the constriction and relaxation of ASM, muscarinic and adrenergic 
receptors are found on inflammatory cells, and drugs that target these receptors 
may also reduce inflammation in COPD. Evidence suggests that the muscarinic and 
adrenergic pathways cross-talk at the level of neuronal input to the ASM via 
second-messenger pathways within ASM cells. Although the cross-talk is not 
completely understood, pharmacologically targeting both pathways in COPD can 
maximize bronchodilation. Combining LAMAs and LABAs demonstrated improved 
efficacy compared with the individual therapies and so, for greater convenience, 
several fixed-dose combinations for once-daily use have been developed. These 
fixed-dose combinations demonstrate improvements in both lung-function and 
patient-reported outcomes compared with well-established monotherapies, with 
similar tolerability profiles to the individual agents.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2015.1080589
PMID: 26293997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jun 10;10:1093-102. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S72858. eCollection 2015.

LAMA/LABA vs ICS/LABA in the treatment of COPD in Japan based on the disease 
phenotypes.

Hizawa N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.

In the combined use of bronchodilators of different classes, ie, long-acting 
beta-agonists (LABAs) and long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), 
bronchodilation is obtained both directly, through LABA-mediated stimulation of 
beta-adrenergic receptors, and indirectly, through LAMA-mediated inhibition of 
acetylcholine action at muscarinic receptors. The clinical trial data for 
LABAs/LAMAs in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
continue to be promising, and these combinations will provide the convenience of 
delivering the two major bronchodilator classes, recommended as first-line 
maintenance options in COPD treatment guidelines. COPD is a complex condition 
that has pulmonary and extrapulmonary manifestations. These clinical 
manifestations are highly variable, and several are associated with different 
responses to currently available therapies. The concept of a COPD phenotype is 
rapidly evolving from one focusing on the clinical characteristics to one 
linking the underlying biology to the phenotype of the disease. Identification 
of the peculiarities of the different COPD phenotypes will permit us to 
implement a more personalized treatment in which the patient's characteristics, 
together with his or her genotype, will be key to choosing the best treatment 
option. At present in Japan, fixed combinations of inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICSs) and LABAs are frequently prescribed in the earlier stages of COPD. 
However, ICSs increase the risk of pneumonia. Notably, 10%-30% of patients with 
COPD with or without a history of asthma have persistent circulating and airway 
eosinophilia associated with an increased risk of exacerbations and sensitivity 
to steroids. Thus, sputum or blood eosinophil counts might identify a 
subpopulation in which ICSs could have potentially deleterious effects as well 
as a subpopulation that benefits from ICSs. In this review, I propose one 
plausible approach to position ICSs and LABAs/LAMAs in clinical practice, based 
on both the extent of airflow obstruction and the presence of an asthma 
component or airway eosinophilic inflammation. This approach is a tentative move 
toward personalized treatment for COPD patients, and with progress in knowledge 
and developments in physiology, lung imaging, medical biology, and genetics, 
identification of COPD phenotypes that provide prognostic and therapeutic 
information that can affect clinically meaningful outcomes is an urgent medical 
need.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S72858
PMCID: PMC4468951
PMID: 26089659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Respir Med. 2017 Nov;132:251-260. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.08.020. Epub 2017 Aug 
24.

Long-term safety of glycopyrrolate/eFlow(®) CS in moderate-to-very-severe COPD: 
Results from the Glycopyrrolate for Obstructive Lung Disease via Electronic 
Nebulizer (GOLDEN) 5 randomized study.

Ferguson GT(1), Goodin T(2), Tosiello R(2), Wheeler A(2), Kerwin E(3).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA. Electronic address: garytferguson@msn.com.
(2)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., Marlborough, MA, USA.
(3)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Inc., Medford, OR, USA.

BACKGROUND: The use of long-acting bronchodilators is an essential component of 
the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The GOLDEN 5 
Phase III, randomized, active-controlled, open-label study was conducted to 
evaluate the long-term safety and tolerability of a nebulized glycopyrrolate 
formulation (SUN-101) delivered via the investigational eFlow® Closed System 
(eFlow® CS) nebulizer in subjects with moderate-to-very-severe COPD.
METHODS: Subjects were randomized in a 4:3 ratio to nebulized glycopyrrolate 
50 μg twice daily (BID) or tiotropium 18 μg once daily (OD) and treated for 48 
weeks. Subjects represented the general COPD population with real-world 
characteristics including severe disease, presence of comorbidities, and 
receiving background COPD therapy. Primary endpoints were the incidence of 
treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), serious TEAEs, and discontinuations 
due to TEAEs. Secondary endpoints included the number of subjects with major 
adverse cardiovascular events (MACE); change from baseline in trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), and assessment of patient-reported outcomes.
RESULTS: 1086 subjects received at least one dose of study drug. The overall 
incidence of TEAEs was comparable for subjects treated with glycopyrrolate 
(69.4%) or tiotropium (67.0%). Serious TEAEs occurred at similar rates in both 
treatment groups (glycopyrrolate, 12.3%; tiotropium, 10.5%). The most frequent 
TEAEs were COPD exacerbation/worsening and cough. Discontinuation due to TEAEs 
was higher in the glycopyrrolate group (10.0%) than the tiotropium group (2.8%) 
and related, in part, to the open-label study design, prior use of long-acting 
muscarinic antagonists and aerosol-airway interactions. Fewer subjects in the 
glycopyrrolate group experienced MACE (glycopyrrolate, n = 3 [0.5%]; tiotropium, 
n = 8 [1.7%]). Nebulized glycopyrrolate treatment resulted in improvements in 
trough FEV1 that were maintained over 48 weeks. Patient-reported health outcomes 
showed improvements, supporting the increases in trough FEV1.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with nebulized glycopyrrolate was well tolerated over 48 
weeks with the most common adverse events being COPD worsening and cough. The 
overall and cardiac safety and tolerability profile and improvements in 
pulmonary function and patient-reported health outcomes support the use of 
nebulized glycopyrrolate as a maintenance treatment for moderate-to-very-severe 
COPD.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02276222.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.08.020
PMID: 28919143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Drug Discov Today. 2015 Mar;20(3):371-9. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2014.11.003. Epub 
2014 Nov 13.

Emerging therapeutic strategies in COPD.

Babu KS(1), Morjaria JB(2).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Southwick Road, 
Cosham, Portsmouth PO6 3LY, UK.
(2)Dept of Academic Respiratory Medicine, Hull York Medical School, University 
of Hull, Castle Hill Hospital, Castle Road, Cottingham HU16 5JQ, UK. Electronic 
address: jaymin.morjaria@hey.nhs.uk.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) management is changing with the 
advent of newer inhaled medications and devices that belong to the current group 
of therapies [i.e. inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), long-acting beta agonists (LABAs) 
and long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs)], providing patients as well as 
physicians with a wider range of options. In this review, we examine Phase II 
studies currently underway in COPD patients. With improved understanding of the 
condition, the role for biological and immunomodulatory therapies in COPD 
patients is also an interesting and important aspect looked upon with great 
enthusiasm. It is indeed interesting to note that the future COPD treatment 
options could include novel interventional strategies in addition to innovative 
inhaled therapies, which have been the backbone of COPD management for the past 
couple of decades.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2014.11.003
PMID: 25462534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Respir Res. 2018 Mar 5;19(1):38. doi: 10.1186/s12931-018-0739-6.

A phase IIb randomized, chronic-dosing, incomplete block, cross-over study of 
glycopyrronium, delivered via metered dose inhaler, compared with a placebo and 
an active control in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.

Kerwin EM(1), Spangenthal S(2), Kollar C(3), St Rose E(4), Reisner C(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, OR, USA. 
ekerwin@criresearch.com.
(2)American Health Research, Charlotte, NC, USA.
(3)Everest Clinical Research, Little Falls, NJ, USA.
(4)Pearl - A member of the AstraZeneca Group, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(5)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and long-acting beta-agonist 
(LABA) bronchodilators are key to the pharmacologic treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This Phase IIb study investigated the 
safety and efficacy of four doses of the LAMA glycopyrronium (GP) delivered 
using co-suspension delivery technology via metered dose inhaler (MDI). The 
study was part of a wider clinical trial program performed to determine the 
optimal dose of GP MDI, the LABA formoterol fumarate dihydrate (FF) MDI, and 
glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate dihydrate (GFF) MDI fixed-dose combination to 
be taken forward into Phase III studies.
METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, 7-day chronic-dosing, three-period 
incomplete block, cross-over study, patients with moderate-to-severe COPD 
received two of the four doses of GP MDI (28.8 μg, 14.4 μg, 7.2 μg, and 3.6 μg) 
twice daily (BID), and either placebo MDI BID or open-label ipratropium MDI 
34 μg four times daily. The primary efficacy endpoint was forced expiratory 
volume in 1 s (FEV1) area under the curve from 0 to 12 h (AUC0-12) relative to 
baseline on Day 7. Secondary and exploratory efficacy endpoints were assessed on 
Days 1 and 7. Safety and tolerability were evaluated throughout the study.
RESULTS: All GP MDI treatments were superior to placebo MDI for the primary 
efficacy endpoint (all p < 0.0001). However, only GP MDI 28.8 μg and 14.4 μg 
demonstrated statistical superiority to placebo MDI for all secondary efficacy 
endpoints analyzed in this study, with the exception of GP MDI 14.4 μg versus 
placebo MDI for the proportion of patients achieving ≥12% improvement in FEV1. 
No nominally significant differences were observed between GP MDI 28.8 μg and GP 
MDI 14.4 μg for any of the endpoints. All doses of GP MDI were well tolerated, 
with no unexpected safety findings.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicated that there was no advantage of GP MDI 28.8 μg 
compared with GP MDI 14.4 μg. It therefore added to the evidence from the Phase 
I/II clinical trial program, which identified GP MDI 14.4 μg as the most 
appropriate dose for use in the Phase III clinical studies.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01350128). Registered May 09, 2011.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-018-0739-6
PMCID: PMC5838878
PMID: 29506504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study was conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practice Guidelines 
including the International Conference on Harmonisation, the US Code of Federal 
Regulations, and the Declaration of Helsinki. An institutional review board 
(Independent Investigational Review Board, Inc., FL, USA; IRB00003563) approved 
the protocol and informed consent form, and written informed consent was 
obtained from patients prior to screening. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: EMK has served on advisory boards, speaker 
panels, or received travel reimbursement from Amphastar, AstraZeneca, Forest, 
Mylan, Novartis, Oriel, Sunovion, Teva, and Theravance. He has conducted 
multicenter clinical trials for ~ 40 pharmaceutical companies. SS serves on the 
speaker’s bureau for Boehringer Ingelheim, Mylan, Pearl – A member of the 
AstraZeneca Group, and Sunovion. CK has no potential conflicts of interest to 
disclose. ESR is an employee of Pearl – A member of the AstraZeneca Group. CR is 
Chief Executive Officer of Pearl – A member of the AstraZeneca Group, and an 
employee of AstraZeneca. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


190. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Dec 27;14:129-139. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S181916. eCollection 2019.

Reduction in exacerbation of COPD in patients of advanced age using the Japanese 
Kampo medicine Dai-kenchu-to: a retrospective cohort study.

Jo T(1)(2), Michihata N(1), Yamana H(1), Sasabuchi Y(3), Matsui H(4), Urushiyama 
H(2), Mitani A(2), Yamauchi Y(2), Fushimi K(5), Nagase T(2), Yasunaga H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Services Research, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, jo-taisuke@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, jo-taisuke@umin.ac.jp.
(3)Data Science Center, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Health Economics, School of Public 
Health, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Health Policy and Informatics, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Patients with symptomatic COPD are recommended to use inhaled 
bronchodilators containing long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMAs). 
However, bronchodilators may cause gastrointestinal adverse effects due to 
anticholinergic reactions, especially in advanced-age patients with COPD. 
Dai-kenchu-to (TU-100, Da Jian Zhong Tang in Chinese) is the most frequently 
prescribed Japanese herbal Kampo medicine and is often prescribed to control 
abdominal bloating and constipation. The purpose of this study was to evaluate 
the role of Dai-kenchu-to as a supportive therapy in advanced-age patients with 
COPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We used the Japanese Diagnosis Procedure Combination 
inpatient database and identified patients aged ≥75 years who were hospitalized 
for COPD exacerbation. We then compared the risk of re-hospitalization for COPD 
exacerbation or death between patients with and without Dai-kenchu-to using 
1-to-4 propensity score matching. A Cox proportional hazards model was used to 
compare the two groups. We performed subgroup analyses for patients with and 
without LAMA therapy.
RESULTS: Patients treated with Dai-kenchu-to had a significantly lower risk of 
re-hospitalization or death after discharge; the HR was 0.82 (95% CI, 0.67-0.99) 
in 1-to-4 propensity score matching. Subgroup analysis of LAMA users showed a 
significant difference in re-hospitalization or death, while subgroup analysis 
of LAMA non-users showed no significant difference.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that Dai-kenchu-to may have improved the 
tolerability of LAMA in advanced-age patients with COPD and, therefore, reduced 
the risk of re-hospitalization or death from COPD exacerbation. Dai-kenchu-to 
may be recommended as a useful supportive therapy for advanced-age patients with 
COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S181916
PMCID: PMC6311323
PMID: 30643399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure TJ (corresponding author), NM, and HY 
have received financial contributions from Tsumura & Company (Tokyo, Japan) 
because they have academic affiliations with the Department of Health Services 
Research, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo supported by 
Tsumura & Company. Tsumura & Company played no role in this study. The 
corresponding author also receives research funding from Tsumura & Company for 
research not related to this study. The authors report no other conflicts of 
interest in this work.


191. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jun 23;12:1867-1876. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S132962. eCollection 2017.

Double bronchodilation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a crude 
analysis from a systematic review.

Lopez-Campos JL(1)(2), Calero-Acuña C(1)(2), Márquez-Martín E(1), Quintana 
Gallego E(1)(2), Carrasco-Hernández L(1), Abad Arranz M(1), Ortega Ruiz F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Virgen del Rocio University Hospital, Biomedicine Institute of Seville 
(IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Universidad de Sevilla, 
Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias 
(CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The combination of a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and a 
long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) in a single inhaler is a viable treatment option 
for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Here, we 
systematically review the current knowledge on double bronchodilation for the 
treatment of COPD, with a specific focus on its efficacy versus placebo and/or 
monotherapy bronchodilation.
METHODS: A systematic review of clinical trials investigating LABA/LAMA 
combination therapies was conducted. Articles were retrieved from PubMed, 
Embase, and Scopus on June 26, 2016. We specifically selected clinical trials 
with a randomized controlled or crossover design published in any scientific 
journal showing the following characteristics: 1) comparison of different 
LABA/LAMA combinations in a single inhaler for patients with COPD, 2) dose 
approved in Europe, and 3) focus on efficacy (versus placebo and/or 
bronchodilator monotherapy) in terms of lung function, respiratory symptoms, or 
exacerbations.
RESULTS: We analyzed 26 clinical trials conducted on 24,338 patients. All 
LABA/LAMA combinations were consistently able to improve lung function compared 
with both placebo and bronchodilator monotherapy. Improvements in symptoms were 
also consistent versus placebo, showing some lack of correlation for some 
clinical end points and combinations versus monotherapy bronchodilation. Albeit 
being an exploratory end point, exacerbations showed an improvement with 
LABA/LAMA combinations over placebo in some trials; however, scarce information 
was available in comparison with bronchodilator monotherapy in most studies.
CONCLUSION: Our data show consistent improvements for LABA/LAMA combinations, 
albeit with some variability (depending on the clinical end point, the specific 
combination, and the comparison group). Clinicians should be aware that these 
are average differences. All treatments should be tailored at the individual 
level to optimize clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S132962
PMCID: PMC5491571
PMID: 28694697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure JLLC has received honoraria for 
lecturing, scientific advice, participation in clinical studies, or writing 
publications from the following sources (listed in alphabetical order): 
Almirall, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cantabria Pharma, Chiesi, 
Esteve, Faes, Ferrer, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Rovi, 
and Takeda, and reports no other conflicts of interest in this work. All of the 
other authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.


192. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 9;14:199-210. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S184127. eCollection 2019.

A randomized trial to determine the impact of indacaterol/glycopyrronium on 
nighttime oxygenation and symptoms in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD: the 
DuoSleep study.

Lehmann S(1)(2), Ringbæk T(3), Løkke A(4), Grote L(5), Hedner J(6), Lindberg 
E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Norwegian Competence Center for Sleep 
Disorders, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 
sverre.lehmann@helse-bergen.no.
(2)Section of Thoracic Medicine, Department of Clinical Science, University of 
Bergen, Bergen, Norway, sverre.lehmann@helse-bergen.no.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Respiratory Diseases and Allergy, Aarhus University Hospital, 
Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sahlgrenska 
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Sleep and Wake Disorders, 
University of Gothenburg and Pulmonary Medicine, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)Department of Medical Sciences, Respiratory, Allergy and Sleep Research, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

PURPOSE: This study investigated the effect of dual bronchodilation with the 
long-acting β-receptor agonist/long acting muscarinic antagonist combination, 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY), on nighttime oxygenation, lung function, 
sleep quality, and symptoms in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a 4-week, double-blind, multicenter, 
placebo-controlled, two-period crossover study. Patients were randomized in a 
1:1 ratio to receive IND/GLY 110/50 µg once daily or matching placebo. The 
primary objective was to evaluate the effect of treatment with IND/GLY on mean 
nighttime oxygenation, compared with placebo. The secondary objective was to 
determine the time spent <90% in blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) compared with 
placebo. Exploratory objectives were to assess the effect of IND/GLY, compared 
with placebo, on sleep quality measured by the Medical Outcomes Study (MOS) 
Sleep Scale and the COPD and Asthma Sleep Impact Scale (CASIS) questionnaires 
and on symptoms assessed by COPD Assessment Test (CAT) questionnaire.
RESULTS: In total, 38 patients were randomized (n=22, IND/GLY; n=16, placebo). 
The change in nighttime oxygenation (SpO2) was similar, and there was a 
comparable difference in time spent <90% SpO2 between IND/GLY and placebo. 
Increases from baseline for the difference between IND/GLY and placebo for 
trough FEV1, FVC, and inspiratory capacity (P<0.05) were seen, with a 
corresponding reduction in residual volume and functional residual capacity 
(P<0.05). IND/GLY treatment showed an improvement in scores for CAT (P=0.0208), 
CASIS, and the MOS Sleep Scale measures, Sleep Problems Index I, Sleep Problems 
Index II (P=0.0315), Sleep Adequacy, Sleep Disturbance Scale, Somnolence Scale, 
and Short of Breath Scale (P=0.0031).
CONCLUSION: In this study, IND/GLY 110/50 µg once daily improved symptoms, sleep 
quality, and lung function, but showed no effect on nighttime oxygenation in 
patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S184127
PMCID: PMC6330967
PMID: 30666100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr Lehmann reports fees to employer 
and other support from Novartis, during the conduct of the study. Dr Løkke 
reports, other than from Novartis during the conduct of the study, personal fees 
and nonfinancial support from Astra-Zeneca; grants, personal fees, and 
nonfinancial support from Boehringer Ingelheim; personal fees and nonfinancial 
support from GlaxoSmithKline; personal fees and nonfinancial support from 
Novartis; personal fees and nonfinancial support from Chiesi; and grants, 
personal fees, and nonfinancial support from Pfizer, outside the submitted work. 
The institution of Dr Grote received payments under the clinical trial agreement 
with Novartis during the conduct of the study. Dr Hedner reports no financial 
conflict of interest; he has one patent related to pharmacological therapy in 
sleep apnea pending and one issued. The authors report no other conflicts of 
interest in this work.


193. Drugs. 2017 Apr;77(6):651-670. doi: 10.1007/s40265-017-0713-5.

Bringing Stability to the Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Patient: 
Clinical and Pharmacological Considerations for Frequent Exacerbators.

Gulati S(1), Wells JM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care, Lung Health Center, 
University of Alabama Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care, Lung Health Center, 
University of Alabama Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. jmwells@uabmc.edu.
(3)Birmingham VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA. jmwells@uabmc.edu.

Acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) are 
critical events associated with an accelerated loss of lung function, increased 
morbidity, and excess mortality. AECOPD are heterogeneous in nature and this may 
directly impact clinical decision making, specifically in patients with frequent 
exacerbations. A 'frequent exacerbator' is a sub-phenotype of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and is defined as an individual who 
experiences two or more moderate-to-severe exacerbations per year. This distinct 
subgroup has higher mortality and accounts for more than half of COPD-related 
hospitalizations annually. Thus, it is imperative to identify individuals at 
risk for frequent exacerbations and choose optimal strategies to minimize risk 
for these events. New paradigms for using combination inhalers and the 
introduction of novel oral compounds provide expanded treatment options to 
reduce the risk and frequency of exacerbations. The goals of managing frequent 
exacerbators or patients at risk for AECOPD are: (1) maximizing bronchodilation; 
(2) reducing inflammation; and (3) targeting specific molecular pathways 
implicated in COPD and AECOPD pathogenesis. Novel inhaler therapies including 
combination long acting muscarinic agents plus long acting beta agonists show 
promising results compared with monotherapy or a long-acting beta agonist 
inhaled corticosteroid combination in reducing exacerbation risk among 
individuals at risk for exacerbations and among frequent exacerbators. Likewise, 
oral medications including macrolides and phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors reduce 
the risk for AECOPD in select groups of individuals at high risk for 
exacerbation. Future direction in COPD management is based on the identification 
of various subtypes or 'endotypes' and targeting therapies based on their 
pathophysiology. This review describes the impact of AECOPD and the challenges 
posed by frequent exacerbators, and explores the rationale for different 
pharmacologic approaches to preventing AECOPD in these individuals.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-017-0713-5
PMCID: PMC5396463
PMID: 28255962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Nov 28;12:3371-3379. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S147070. eCollection 2017.

Adherence to a COPD treatment guideline among patients in Hong Kong.

Chan KP(1), Ko FW(1), Chan HS(2), Wong ML(3), Mok TY(4), Choo KL(5), Hui DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital.
(2)Department of Medicine, Alice Ho Miu Ling Nethersole Hospital.
(3)Department of Medicine and Geriatrics, Caritas Medical Centre.
(4)Respiratory Medical Department, Kowloon Hospital.
(5)Department of Medicine, North District Hospital, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to assess the adherence rate of pharmacological 
treatment to the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
guideline published in 2011 and the prevalence of comorbidities among patients 
with COPD in Hong Kong (HK).
METHODS: Patients were recruited from five tertiary respiratory centers and 
followed up for 12 months. Data on baseline physiological, spirometric 
parameters, use of COPD medications and coexisting comorbidities were collected. 
The relationship between guideline adherence rate and subsequent COPD 
exacerbations was assessed.
RESULTS: Altogether, 450 patients were recruited. The mean age was 73.7±8.5 
years, and 92.2% of them were males. Approximately 95% of them were 
ever-smokers, and the mean post-bronchodilator (BD) forced expiratory volume in 
1 second was 50.8%±21.7% predicted. The mean COPD Assessment Test and modified 
Medical Research Council Dyspnea Scale were 13.2±8.1 and 2.1±1.0, respectively. 
In all, five (1.1%), 164 (36.4%), eight (1.8%) and 273 (60.7%) patients belonged 
to COPD groups A, B, C and D, respectively. The guideline adherence rate for 
pharmacological treatment ranged from 47.7% to 58.1% in the three clinic visits 
over 12 months, with overprescription of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and 
underutilization of long-acting BDs in group B COPD patients. Guideline 
nonadherence was not associated with increased risk of exacerbation after 
adjustment of confounding variables. However, this study was not powered to 
assess a difference in exacerbations. In all, 80.9% of patients had at least one 
comorbidity.
CONCLUSION: A suboptimal adherence to GOLD guideline 2011, with overprescription 
of ICS, was identified. The commonly found comorbidities also aligned with the 
trend observed in other observational cohorts.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S147070
PMCID: PMC5713700
PMID: 29238182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure All authors reported no conflicts of 
interest in this work and received no personal fee from any grant or commercial 
companies.


195. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Apr;9(2):49-55. doi: 10.1177/1753465815572065. Epub 
2015 Feb 17.

Combination therapy with indacaterol and glycopyrronium bromide in the 
management of COPD: an update on the evidence for efficacy and safety.

Ridolo E(1), Montagni M(1), Riario-Sforza GG(2), Baroni M(2), Incorvaia C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, 
Italy.
(2)Pulmonary Rehabilitation, ICP Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(3)Pulmonary Rehabilitation, ICP Hospital, Milan, Italy 
cristoforo.incorvaia@gmail.com.

The international guidelines on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
recommend inhaled bronchodilators for maintenance treatment of the disease. 
These drugs include beta-agonists and muscarinic antagonists, which are both 
available as short-acting agents (to be used as needed for dyspnea) and 
long-acting agents. To the latter belong salmeterol and formoterol (long-acting 
beta-agonists) and indacaterol, vilanterol and olodaterol (very long-acting 
beta-agonist) as beta-agonists, and tiotropium, aclidinium and glycopyrronium 
bromide as long acting muscarinic antagonists. The efficacy and safety of 
indacaterol and glycopyrronium as monotherapies has been demonstrated in several 
controlled trials. However, in some patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, 
symptoms are poorly controlled by bronchodilator monotherapy; in these cases the 
addition of a second bronchodilator from a different pharmacological class may 
be beneficial. Here we review the evidence from published randomized trials 
concerning the efficacy and safety of the once-daily fixed-dose dual 
bronchodilator combining indacaterol and glycopyrronium.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815572065
PMID: 25691493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Dec 30;12:135-140. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S114273. eCollection 2017.

Spotlight on fluticasone furoate/umeclidinium/vilanterol in COPD: design, 
development, and potential place in therapy.

Lal C(1), Strange C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

COPD is characterized by persistent airflow obstruction caused by exposure to 
irritants including cigarette smoke, dust, and fumes. According to the latest 
GOLD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease) guidelines, a 
combination of inhaled corticosteroids, long-acting beta agonists, and long-acting 
muscarinic receptor antagonists can be used for group D COPD patients who are at 
high risk for exacerbations. Umeclidinium/fluticasone furoate/vilanterol is one 
such triple-combination therapy currently under development with some completed 
and several ongoing clinical trials. This review paper summarizes the 
pharmacologic profiles of these medications and highlights findings from 
clinical trials, including safety and efficacy data, while speculating on the 
role of this therapy in current treatment for COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S114273
PMCID: PMC5221559
PMID: 28115838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Charlie Strange has current, past, or pending 
grants in COPD from the Alpha-1 Foundation, CSL Behring, Entera Health, Grifols, 
Shire, and the NIH. He consults for Abeona, AstraZeneca, CSL Behring, and 
Grifols, on COPD. Dr Chitra Lal has received grant support from Jazz 
Pharmaceuticals and Invado Pharmaceuticals and is a consultant for Ikaria 
Pharmceuticals. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


197. Br J Gen Pract. 2019 Jan;69(678):e1-e7. doi: 10.3399/bjgp18X700385. Epub 2018 
Dec 17.

Inaccurate diagnosis of COPD: the Welsh National COPD Audit.

Fisk M(1), McMillan V(2), Brown J(3), Holzhauer-Barrie J(2), Khan MS(2), Baxter 
N(4), Roberts CM(5).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Medicine and Immunotherapeutics (EMIT) Department, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge.
(2)National COPD Audit Programme.
(3)Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust and UCL Respiratory, Division of 
Medicine, University College London, London.
(4)National COPD Audit Programme Primary Care Workstream, Royal College of 
Physicians, London.
(5)National COPD Audit Programme; associate director, Clinical Effectiveness and 
Evaluation Unit, Care Quality Improvement Department, Royal College of 
Physicians, London.

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is 
confirmed with spirometry demonstrating persistent airflow obstruction.
AIM: To evaluate the clinical characteristics and management of patients in 
primary care on COPD registers with spirometry incompatible with COPD.
DESIGN AND SETTING: A primary care audit of Welsh COPD Read-Coded patient data 
from the Quality and Outcomes Framework (QOF) COPD register in Wales.
METHOD: Patients on the QOF COPD register with incompatible spirometry 
(post-bronchodilator forced expiratory lung volume in 1 second/forced vital 
capacity [FEV1/FVC] ratio ≥0.70) were compared with those with compatible 
spirometry (FEV1/FVC <0.70).
RESULTS: This audit included 63% of Welsh practices contributing 48 105 
patients. Only 19% (n = 8957) of patients were post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC 
Read-Coded and were included in this study. Of these, 75% (n = 6702) had 
compatible spirometry and 25% (n = 2255) did not. Patients with incompatible 
spirometry were more likely female (P = 0.009), never-smokers (P<0.001), had 
higher body mass index (P<0.001), and better mean FEV1 (P<0.001). Medical 
Research Council (MRC) breathlessness scores, exacerbation frequency, and asthma 
co-diagnosis were similar between groups. Patients in both groups were just as 
likely to receive inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and long-acting beta-agonists 
(LABAs), but patients with incompatible spirometry were less likely to receive 
long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) (P<0.001) or LABA/ICS (P = 0.002) 
combinations.
CONCLUSION: Patients on the COPD QOF register with spirometry incompatible with 
COPD are symptomatic and managed using significant resources. If quality of care 
and effective resource use are to be improved, focus must be given to correct 
diagnosis in this group.

© British Journal of General Practice 2019.

DOI: 10.3399/bjgp18X700385
PMCID: PMC6301368
PMID: 30559109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 28;10:2055-66. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S90658. eCollection 2015.

Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination and tiotropium 
bromide among COPD patients new to these controller treatments.

Trudo F(1), Kern DM(2), Davis JR(1), Tunceli O(2), Zhou S(2), Graham EL(3), 
Strange C(4), Williams SA(1).

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(2)HealthCore, Inc., Wilmington, DE, USA.
(3)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Alderley Park, Cheshire, UK.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist combinations and/or 
long acting muscarinic antagonists are recommended first-line therapies for 
preventing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation. 
Comparative effectiveness of budesonide/formoterol combination (BFC, an inhaled 
corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist combination) vs tiotropium (long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist) in the US has not yet been studied.
METHODS: Using US claims data from the HealthCore Integrated Research 
Environment, COPD patients (with or without comorbid asthma) ≥40 years old 
initiating BFC or tiotropium between March 1, 2009 and February 28, 2012 and at 
risk for exacerbation were identified and followed for 12 months. Patients were 
propensity score matched on demographics and COPD disease severity indicators. 
The primary outcome was time to first COPD exacerbation. Secondary outcomes 
included COPD exacerbation rate, health care resource utilization, and costs.
RESULTS: The Cox proportional hazards model for time to first exacerbation 
yielded a hazard ratio (HR) of 0.78 (95% CI =[0.70, 0.87], P<0.001), indicating 
a 22% reduction in risk of COPD exacerbation associated with initiation of BFC 
versus tiotropium. A post hoc sensitivity analysis found similar effects in 
those who had a prior asthma diagnosis (HR =0.72 [0.61, 0.86]) and those who did 
not (HR =0.83 [0.72, 0.96]). BFC initiation was associated with lower 
COPD-related health care resource utilization and costs ($4,084 per patient-year 
compared with $5,656 for tiotropium patients, P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: In COPD patients new to controller therapies, initiating treatment 
with BFC was associated with improvements in health and economic outcomes 
compared with tiotropium.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S90658
PMCID: PMC4592033
PMID: 26451101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Aug 24;8(8):CD012355. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD012355.pub2.

Once-daily long-acting beta₂-agonists/inhaled corticosteroids combined inhalers 
versus inhaled long acting muscarinic antagonists for people with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Sliwka A(1), Jankowski M, Gross-Sondej I, Storman M, Nowobilski R, Bala MM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health Science, Jagiellonian 
University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD012355.

BACKGROUND: Three classes of inhaler medication are used to manage chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): long-acting beta₂-agonists (LABA); 
long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA); and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). To 
encourage patient adherence, two classes of medication are often combined in a 
single medication device; it seems that once-daily dosing offers greatest 
convenience to patients and may markedly influence adherence.
OBJECTIVES: To compare a once-daily combination of inhaled corticosteroid and 
long-acting beta₂-agonist inhalers (ICS/LABA) versus inhaled long-acting 
muscarinic antagonists alone (LAMA) for people with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
SEARCH METHODS: We performed an electronic search of the Specialised Register of 
the Cochrane Airways Group (14 May 2018), ClinicalTrials.gov (14 May 2018), and 
the World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform 
(20 September 2017), then a search of other resources, including reference lists 
of included studies and manufacturers' trial registers (10 October 2017). Two 
pairs of review authors screened and scrutinised selected articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing 
once-daily administered ICS/LABA and LAMA in adults with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted data 
and assessed risk of bias in each study. We analysed dichotomous data as 
random-effects odds ratios (ORs) and continuous data as mean differences (MDs), 
both with 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs), using Review Manager 5.
MAIN RESULTS: We included two studies with 880 participants. We identified one 
ongoing trial with planned recruitment of 80 participants. Included studies 
enrolled participants with both partially reversible and non-reversible COPD and 
baseline mean per cent predicted (%pred) forced expiratory volume in one second 
(FEV₁) of 43.4 to 49.6. Both studies lasted 12 weeks. Both studies used the same 
combination of inhaled ICS/LABA (fluticasone furoate and vilanterol 100/25 mcg 
once daily; FF/VI) versus LAMA (18 mcg tiotropium; TIO). They were published as 
full articles, and neither study was at low risk of bias in all domains.Compared 
to the TIO arm, results for pooled primary outcomes for the FF/VI arm were as 
follows: mortality: OR 0.20, 95% CI 0.02 to 1.73, 880 participants (deaths 
reported only in the TIO arm), very low-quality evidence; COPD exacerbation 
(requiring short-burst oral corticosteroids or antibiotics, or both): OR 0.72, 
95% Cl 0.35 to 1.50, 880 participants, very low-quality evidence; pneumonia: 
reported in both studies only during treatment with FF/VI: OR 6.12, 95% Cl 0.73 
to 51.24, 880 participants, very low-quality evidence; and total serious adverse 
events: OR 0.96, 95% Cl 0.50 to 1.83, 880 participants, very low-quality 
evidence. None of the pneumonias were fatal. Compared to the TIO arm, we found 
no statistically significant difference for pooled secondary outcomes, including 
St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) mean total score change; hospital 
admissions (all-cause); disease-specific adverse events; mean weekly rescue 
medication use (results available from only one of the studies); and mean weekly 
percentage of rescue-free days for FF/VI. We found no statistically significant 
differences between ICS/LABA and LAMA for improvement in symptoms measured by 
the COPD Assessment Test (CAT score) nor for FEV₁ (change from baseline trough 
in 24-hour weighted mean on treatment day 84). Many pooled estimates lacked 
precision. Data for other endpoints such as exacerbations leading to intubation 
and physical activity measures were not available in included trials.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Based on analysis of primary and secondary outcomes, we 
are uncertain whether once-daily ICS/LABA, combined in one inhaler, has a 
different efficacy or adverse effect profile compared to LAMA for treatment of 
people with COPD. However, the current review is based on only two trials with 
the main focus on primary outcomes other than those considered in this review. 
The short follow-up period and the very low quality of evidence limit our 
confidence in the result and increase uncertainty. Further trials of longer 
duration are needed. Current evidence is not strong enough to demonstrate 
important differences between inhalers in terms of effects, nor to establish 
that once-daily fluticasone/vilanterol 100/25 mcg and tiotropium 18 mcg are 
equivalent.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012355.pub2
PMCID: PMC6513478
PMID: 30141826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AS has no known conflicts of interest. MJ 
receives honoraria (as a freelancer) from the publishing company Medycyna 
Praktyczna, which draws its revenue from many pharmaceutical and medical 
companies; he is not involved in any interactions with these companies. He is 
unaware of any direct conflicts of interest. IGS worked without payment as a 
consultant for a company that carries out trials for pharmaceutical companies 
(Cempra, AstraZeneca, Boehringer‐Ingelheim) for unrelated indications. She is 
unaware of any direct conflicts of interest. MS has no known conflicts of 
interest. RN has no known conflicts of interest. MMB receives honoraria (as a 
freelancer) from a systematic review company (Kleijnen Systematic Reviews Ltd.), 
which has also worked for pharmaceutical companies such as GlaxoSmithKline and 
Beecham, but was not involved in any interactions with pharmaceutical companies. 
She is unaware of any direct conflicts of interest.


200. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jul 23;10:1383-92. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S55488. eCollection 2015.

Clinical role of dual bronchodilation with an indacaterol-glycopyrronium 
combination in the management of COPD: its impact on patient-related outcomes 
and quality of life.

Rossi A(1), Zanardi E(2), Poletti V(3), Cazzola M(4).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Respiratory and General Rehabilitation, ULSS 20, Verona, Italy.
(3)Pulmonary Unit, GB Morgani Hospital, AUSL 20, Forli, Italy.
(4)Pulmonary Unit, University of Rome, Tor Vergata, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the result of persistent and 
progressive pathologic abnormalities in the small airways, most often associated 
with alveolar loss. Smoking cessation is the most effective intervention to slow 
down the progression of COPD. Long-acting inhaled bronchodilators are prescribed 
for the symptomatic relief at any stage of disease severity. For patients whose 
COPD cannot be not sufficiently controlled with long-acting bronchodilator 
monotherapy, international guidelines suggest the possibility of associating a 
long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA) with a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA), ie, dual bronchodilation. This is not a new concept as the combination 
of short-acting agents has been popular in the past. In recent years, several 
fixed-dose combinations containing a LAMA and a LABA in a single inhaler have 
been approved by regulatory authorities in several countries. Among the new 
LAMA/LABA combinations, the fixed-dose combination of indacaterol 110 
µg/glycopyrronium 50 µg (QVA149) has been shown in a series of clinical trials 
to be as safe as the single components and placebo, and more effective than 
placebo and the single components with regard to lung function, symptoms, and 
patient-oriented outcomes. Furthermore, QVA149 achieved better bronchodilation 
than salmeterol 50 µg/fluticasone 500 µg twice daily. Compared with tiotropium, 
a well-recognized treatment for COPD, the percentage of patients that exceed the 
minimal clinical important difference for dyspnea and health-related quality of 
life measurements was superior with QVA149. Other patient-oriented outcomes, 
such as daily symptoms, night-time awakening, and use of rescue medication 
consistently favored QVA149. Finally, QVA149 was significantly superior to LAMAs 
for reducing all types of exacerbation. In conclusion, several years after 
introduction of dual bronchodilation, the fixed-dose combination of indacaterol 
110 µg/glycopyrronium 50 µg in a single inhaler for once-daily administration 
via the Breezhaler device (QVA149) has been demonstrated to be a safe and 
effective treatment for COPD patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S55488
PMCID: PMC4516211
PMID: 26229457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2017;237:197-212. doi: 10.1007/164_2016_69.

Bifunctional Drugs for the Treatment of Respiratory Diseases.

Page C(1), Cazzola M(2).

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Science, King's College London, 150 Stamford Street, London, SE1 9NH, UK. 
clive.page@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine and Research Unit of Respiratory Clinical 
Pharmacology, Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", 
Rome, Italy.

Over the last decade, there has been a steady increase in the use of fixed dose 
combinations for the treatment of a range of diseases, including cancer, AIDS, 
tuberculosis and other infectious diseases. It is now evident that patients with 
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) can also benefit from the 
use of fixed dose combinations, including combinations of a long-acting 
beta-agonist (LABA) and an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), and combinations of LABAs 
and long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMAs). There are now also 
"triple inhaler" fixed dose combinations (containing a LABA, LAMA and ICS) under 
development and already being made available in clinical practice, with the 
first such triple combination having been approved in India. The use of 
combinations containing drugs with complementary pharmacological actions in the 
treatment of patients with asthma or COPD has led to the discovery and 
development of drugs having two different primary pharmacological actions in the 
same molecule that we have called "bifunctional drugs". In this review we have 
discussed the state of the art of bifunctional drugs that can be categorized as 
bifunctional bronchodilators, bifunctional bronchodilator/anti-inflammatory 
drugs, bifunctional anti-inflammatory drugs and bifunctional mucolytic and 
anti-inflammatory drugs.

DOI: 10.1007/164_2016_69
PMID: 27787715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Sep 11;12:2711-2721. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S143244. eCollection 2017.

Comparative study on medical utilization and costs of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease with good lung function.

Lim JU(1), Kim K(2), Kim SH(3), Lee MG(4), Lee SY(5), Yoo KH(6), Lee SH(1), Jung 
KS(7), Rhee CK(2), Hwang YI(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, St Paul's Hospital.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Seoul St Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul.
(3)Big Data Division, Health Insurance Review and Assessment Service, Wonju.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Hallym University Chuncheon Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym 
University College of Medicine, Chuncheon.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University, Anam Hospital.
(6)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul.
(7)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Hallym University Medical Center, Hallym University College 
of Medicine, Anyang, Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with mild to moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) are underdiagnosed and undertreated due to the asymptomatic 
nature of the disease. Previous studies on patients with mild COPD have focused 
on symptomatic patients. Therefore, in this study, we evaluated the treatment 
status of patients with early COPD in Korea.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We compared hospital visits, medical costs per person, 
and COPD medication use by patients with COPD screened from the general 
population and COPD cohort patients. Patients with COPD aged ≥40 years with the 
value of forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) ≥60% were selected from the 2007 
to 2012 Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (KNHANES) data. 
Data including the number of outpatient clinic visits, admission to hospitals, 
COPD-related medications, and medical costs were obtained from the Health 
Insurance Review and Assessment Service and were compared with the data of 
patients with COPD with FEV1 ≥60% from the Korean COPD Subtype Study (KOCOSS) 
cohort.
RESULTS: Based on EuroQol 5-dimension questionnaire index scores of 0.9±0.14, we 
found that patients with COPD from the KNHANES group showed few symptoms 
compared to those from the KOCOSS cohort. In 2007, among the patients with COPD 
with an FEV1 value of ≥60%, only 3.6% from the KNHANES group and 30% from the 
KOCOSS cohort visited medical facilities. Total medical cost per person per year 
increased from 264.37±663.41 US Dollars (USD) in 2007 to 797.00±2,724.21 USD in 
2012 for the KNHANES group. In 2012, only 20.7% of the patients from KNHANES 
database received long acting muscarinic agonists (LAMA), whereas 78.7% of the 
patients from KOCOSS database received LAMA.
CONCLUSION: Medical resource utilization and medical costs per person for 
patients with early COPD in Korea increased. However, asymptomatic patients with 
COPD represented by the KNHANES group do not receive adequate long-term 
treatment compared to relatively symptomatic patients, and require more clinical 
attention from physicians.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S143244
PMCID: PMC5602441
PMID: 28979113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


203. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Apr 4;13:1079-1088. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S159103. eCollection 2018.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of a fixed-dose combination of indacaterol and 
glycopyrronium as maintenance treatment for COPD.

Chan MC(#)(1), Tan EC(2), Yang MC(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Chest Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Taichung Veterans 
General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)National Research Institute of Chinese Medicine, Ministry of Health and 
Welfare, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(3)Institute of Health Policy and Management, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of the 
long-acting beta-2 agonist (LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) dual 
bronchodilator indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) as a maintenance treatment 
for COPD patients from the perspective of health care payer in Taiwan.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We adopted a patient-level simulation model, which 
included a cohort of COPD patients aged ≥40 years. The intervention used in the 
study was the treatment using IND/GLY, and comparators were tiotropium or 
salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC). Data related to the efficacy of drugs, 
incidence of exacerbation, and utility were obtained from clinical studies. 
Direct costs were estimated from claims data based on the severity of COPD. The 
cycle length was 6 months (to match forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] 
data), and the time horizons included 1, 3, 5, 10 years, and lifetime. 
Deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were conducted to test the 
robustness of the model results. Costs were expressed in US dollars with a 
discount rate of 3.0%.
RESULTS: Compared to tiotropium and SFC, the incremental cost-effectiveness 
ratios (ICERs) per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) gained of patients treated 
with IND/GLY were US$5,987 and US$14,990, respectively. One-way sensitivity 
analysis revealed that the improvement in FEV1 provided by IND/GLY, the 
distribution of patients with regard to the severity of COPD, and acute 
exacerbation rate ratio were the key drivers behind cost-effectiveness. Adopting 
a willingness to pay of US$60,000 per QALY gained as the threshold, there was a 
98.7% probability that IND/GLY was cost-effective compared to tiotropium. 
Similarly, there was a 99.9% probability that IND/GLY was cost-effective 
compared to SFC.
CONCLUSION: As a maintenance treatment for COPD, we consider the dual 
bronchodilator IND/GLY as a cost-effective strategy when compared to either 
tiotropium or SFC.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S159103
PMCID: PMC5894684
PMID: 29670344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


204. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2017 Jul;10(7):685-698. doi: 
10.1080/17512433.2017.1320218. Epub 2017 May 2.

GFF MDI for the improvement of lung function in COPD - A look at the PINNACLE-1 
and PINNACLE-2 data and beyond.

Rabe KF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North , Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL) , Grosshansdorf , Germany.
(2)b Department of Medicine , Christian-Albrechts University Kiel , Kiel , 
Germany.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the third leading cause of death 
globally and incidence rates are continuing to rise. Long-acting bronchodilators 
are the foundation on which current pharmacological approaches to COPD 
management are built, with long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) and 
long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) recommended across the spectrum of the disease 
continuum. Combining LAMAs and LABAs provides additional lung function 
improvements and relief of patient symptoms compared with either therapy alone. 
Several options for LAMA/LABA fixed-dose combinations (FDC) delivered via a 
single inhaler device are available; however, only recently has a LAMA/LABA FDC 
become available as a pressurized metered dose inhaler (MDI). Areas covered: 
This article describes the rationale for the development of the LAMA/LABA FDC of 
glycopyrrolate and formoterol fumarate, formulated by Co-Suspension™ Delivery 
Technology and delivered by MDI (GFF MDI). The clinical trial program of GFF 
MDI, including the pivotal Phase III studies (PINNACLE-1 and PINNACLE-2) that 
supported regulatory approval, are reviewed, providing insights into 
interpretation and future directions for research. Expert commentary: LAMA/LABA 
FDCs are already a crucial part of the COPD treatment paradigm, but additional 
data are needed in order to maximize their role as maintenance therapies in 
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2017.1320218
PMID: 28443352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Eur Respir Rev. 2017 Jan 17;26(143):160043. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0043-2016. 
Print 2017 Jan.

LABA/LAMA combination in COPD: a meta-analysis on the duration of treatment.

Calzetta L(1), Rogliani P(1)(2), Ora J(2), Puxeddu E(1), Cazzola M(1), Matera 
MG(3).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Tor Vergata, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Dept of Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

When there are no randomised clinical trials directly comparing all relevant 
treatment options, an indirect treatment comparison via meta-analysis of the 
available clinical evidence is an acceptable alternative. However, meta-analyses 
may be very misleading if not adequately performed. Here, we propose and 
validate a simple and effective approach to meta-analysis for exploring the 
effectiveness of long-acting beta-agonist (LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) fixed-dose combinations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.14 
articles with 20 329 patients (combinations n=9292; monocomponents n=11 037) 
were included in this study. LABA/LAMA combinations were always more effective 
than the monocomponents in terms of the improvement in trough forced expiratory 
volume in 1 s, transition dyspnoea index and St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire scores after 3, 6 and 12 months of treatment. No significant 
publication bias was identified. Significant discrepancies with previous network 
meta-analyses have been found, with overall differences ranging from 26.7% to 
43.3%.Results from previous network meta-analyses were misleading because no 
adequate attention was given to formulating the review question, specifying 
eligibility criteria, correctly identifying studies, collecting appropriate 
information and deciding what it would be pharmacologically relevant to analyse. 
The real gradient of effectiveness of LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations remains 
an unmet medical need; however, it can be investigated indirectly using a 
high-quality meta-analytic approach.

Copyright ©ERS 2017.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0043-2016
PMID: 28096283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Drug Ther Bull. 2015 Jul;53(7):81-4. doi: 10.1136/dtb.2015.7.0340.

▼Umeclidinium: another LAMA for COPD.

[No authors listed]

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects around 64 million people 
worldwide and is the fourth leading cause of death.(1) It is thought that 3 
million people have COPD in the UK, with about 900,000 having been diagnosed and 
an estimated 2.1 million with disease that remains undiagnosed.(2) In addition, 
premature mortality from COPD in the UK is almost double the European average 
and as a result there has been considerable focus on improving outcomes for 
patients.(3)One of the options for maintenance pharmacological treatment of COPD 
is a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA).(4) DTB has previously reviewed 
three inhaled LAMAs licensed in the UK for use by people with COPD: tiotropium 
and ▼glycopyrronium (both administered once daily), and ▼aclidinium bromide 
(administered twice daily).(5-8) ▼Umeclidinium bromide (Incruse) is another once 
daily LAMA, delivered using the Ellipta inhaler device, and is indicated as 
maintenance bronchodilator treatment to relieve symptoms in adult patients with 
COPD.(9) Here we review the evidence for its use in the management of COPD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/dtb.2015.7.0340
PMID: 26159701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Nov 1;12:3195-3201. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S149054. eCollection 2017.

Efficacy of tiotropium and indacaterol monotherapy and their combination on 
dynamic lung hyperinflation in COPD: a random open-label crossover study.

Fujimoto K(1), Yamazaki H(2), Ura M(2), Kitaguchi Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, School of Health Sciences.
(2)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, Graduate School of Medicine.
(3)First Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Shinshu 
University, Matsumoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The difference in efficacy of long acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMAs) and long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) for dynamic lung 
hyperinflation (DLH) in COPD is unclear. The purpose of this study was to 
elucidate the difference in efficacy of LAMA and LABA alone and the combination 
thereof for DLH.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Thirty stable patients were enrolled and randomly divided 
into two groups following baseline measurements. One group was treated with 5 μg 
tiotropium (Respimat inhaler) for 4 weeks following a 4-week treatment with 150 
μg indacaterol, while the other group was treated with indacaterol for 4 weeks 
following a 4-week treatment with tiotropium. For both groups, these treatments 
were followed by a combination of the two drugs for 4 weeks. Pulmonary function 
tests, including DLH evaluated by metronome-paced incremental hyperventilation 
and exercise tolerance evaluated by the shuttle-walk test, were performed at the 
end of each treatment period.
RESULTS: In total, 23 patients completed this study. Both tiotropium and 
indacaterol alone significantly increased forced expiratory volume in 1 second, 
exercise tolerance, and improved health status. Tiotropium significantly 
improved DLH, but indacaterol did not. The combination therapy resulted in 
further improvements in lung function and exercise tolerance, but not in DLH.
CONCLUSION: The efficacy of tiotropium in inhibiting DLH following 
metronome-paced incremental hyperventilation may be superior to that of 150 μg 
indacaterol, although the effects on airflow obstruction were the same, and the 
combination therapy showed further improvement in airflow obstruction, but not 
in DLH.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S149054
PMCID: PMC5679691
PMID: 29138547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


208. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2016 Mar;22(2):119-24. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000240.

An update on pharmacologic management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Patel HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern, Dallas, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a widespread 
disease process with important clinical and economic implications. This review 
will summarize new pharmacotherapy for the treatment of COPD.
RECENT FINDINGS: Several recent clinical trials have led to the approval of new 
inhaler therapies for COPD. Many of these are specifically targeting combination 
long-acting β-agonists and long acting muscarinic antagonists for late stage 
COPD.
SUMMARY: Several new bronchodilators are available on the market, especially in 
combination form. The new drug combinations have positive data though clinical 
relevance, and comparisons to available and well established therapies are still 
needed. Specifically, translating improved forced expiratory volume into 
meaningful clinical outcomes remains challenging.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000240
PMID: 26814721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jan 7;10:111-23. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S67758. 
eCollection 2015.

Profile of inhaled glycopyrronium bromide as monotherapy and in fixed-dose 
combination with indacaterol maleate for the treatment of COPD.

Prakash A(1), Babu KS(2), Morjaria JB(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, UK.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Cosham, 
Portsmouth, UK.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, UK ; 
Department of Academic Respiratory Medicine, Hull York Medical School, 
University of Hull, Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, UK.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of morbidity and 
mortality. The cornerstone of pharmacological treatment for COPD is 
bronchodilation. Inhaled glycopyrronium bromide is a long acting muscarinic 
antagonist developed as a maintenance treatment for patients with COPD. Phase 
III trials have shown that glycopyrronium produces rapid and sustained 
bronchodilation with an efficacy similar to tiotropium and is well tolerated, 
with a low incidence of muscarinic side effects in patients with moderate to 
severe COPD. A combination of glycopyrronium bromide with indacaterol maleate 
(QVA149) has recently been approved as a once-daily maintenance therapy in adult 
patients with COPD. Phase III trials (the IGNITE program) with QVA149 have 
demonstrated significant improvements in lung function versus placebo, 
glycopyrronium, and tiotropium in patients with moderate to severe COPD, with no 
safety concerns of note. Hence QVA149 is a safe treatment option for moderate to 
severe COPD patients in whom long acting muscarinic antagonist monotherapy is 
inadequate.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S67758
PMCID: PMC4293295
PMID: 25609944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Nov 22;11:2851-2858. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S109707. eCollection 2016.

The burden of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease associated with maintenance 
monotherapy in the UK.

Edwards SC(1), Fairbrother SE(2), Scowcroft A(3), Chiu G(4), Ternouth A(3), 
Lipworth BJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Market Access Pricing & Outcomes Research.
(2)Department of Medical Affairs -Respiratory.
(3)Department of Market Access.
(4)Department of Prescription Medicine - Respiratory, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Bracknell, UK.
(5)Asthma and Allergy Research Group, Division of Cardiovascular and Diabetes 
Medicine, Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, University of Dundee, 
Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK.

BACKGROUND: This study characterized a cohort of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) patients on maintenance bronchodilator monotherapy for ≥6 months 
to establish their disease burden, measured by health care utilization.
METHODS: Data were extracted from the UK Clinical Practice Research Datalink and 
linked to Hospital Episode Statistics. The monotherapy period spanned the first 
prescription of a long-acting beta-adrenergic agonist or a long acting muscarinic 
antagonist until the end of the study (December 31, 2013) or until step up to 
dual/triple therapy, for example, addition of another long-acting 
bronchodilator, an inhaled corticosteroid, or both. A minimum of four 
consecutive prescriptions and 6 months on continuous monotherapy were required. 
Patients <50 years old at first COPD diagnosis or with another significant 
respiratory disease before starting monotherapy were excluded. Disease burden 
was evaluated by measuring patients' rate of face-to-face interactions with a 
health care professional (HCP), COPD-related exacerbations, hospitalizations, 
and referrals.
RESULTS: A cohort of 8,811 COPD patients (95% Global initiative for chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease stage A/B) on maintenance monotherapy was identified 
between 2002 and 2013; 45% of these patients were still on monotherapy by the 
end of the study. Median time from first COPD diagnosis to first monotherapy 
prescription was 56 days, while the median time on maintenance bronchodilator 
monotherapy was 2 years. The median number of prescriptions was 14. On average, 
patients had 15 HCP interactions per year, and one in ten patients experienced a 
COPD exacerbation (N=8,811). One in 50 patients were hospitalized for COPD per 
year (n=4,848).
CONCLUSION: The average monotherapy-treated patient had a higher than average 
HCP interaction rate. We also identified a large cohort of patients who were 
stepped up to triple therapy despite a low rate of exacerbations. The use of the 
new class of long acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta-adrenergic agonist 
fixed-dose combinations may provide a useful step-up treatment option in such 
monotherapy patients, before the use of inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S109707
PMCID: PMC5125989
PMID: 27920512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SE and SF are former employees of Boehringer 
Ingelheim Ltd., and AS, GC, and AT are currently employed by Boehringer 
Ingelheim Ltd. BJL has received payments for consulting and advisory boards from 
BI, Chiesi, Cipla, Dr Reddys, Sandoz, and Teva; support to attend educational 
meetings from BI, Teva, and Chiesi; and payment for talks from Meda and Teva. 
The Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research has received unrestricted research 
grant support from Teva, Chiesi, and Almirral and payment for multicenter trials 
from AstraZeneca, Janssen, Teva, and Roche. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


211. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 2017 Jun;31(2):167-178. doi: 
10.1016/j.bpa.2017.07.007. Epub 2017 Jul 25.

Long-term management of patients with end-stage lung diseases.

Briganti DF(1), D'Ovidio F(2).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Division, Lung Transplant Program, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Grande 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(2)Thoracic Surgery, Lung Transplant Program, NewYork-Presbyterian, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, USA. Electronic address: 
fd2133@cumc.columbia.edu.

Long-term management of end-stage lung disease differs from interstitial lung 
disease to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease to cystic fibrosis to pulmonary 
vascular disease. The management includes pharmacological therapy that is 
disease specific such as antibiotic therapy for cystic fibrosis, antifibrotic 
drugs in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis; long-acting beta-agonists, long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist, and inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease; and vasodilators in pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
Moreover, non-pharmacological therapy is essential in the treatment of these 
diseases, in particular, rehabilitation and supportive therapy, which are 
necessary in all end-stage lung diseases and specific intervention such as 
non-invasive ventilation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and cystic 
fibrosis, surgical therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and airway 
clearance in cystic fibrosis. The goal is not only to prolong survival, but it 
is fundamental to keep patients in good general conditions for transplantation. 
Transplantation, indeed, remains the only therapeutic option that could prolong 
survival in patients with terminal lung disease when medical or surgical 
therapies are not available or not effective anymore.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpa.2017.07.007
PMID: 29110790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2016 Sep;10(9):1023-33. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2016.1188693. Epub 2016 May 23.

UPLIFT study - understanding potential long-term impacts on function with 
tiotropium - and sub-analyses. Bibliographic resume of the obtained results.

Callejas González FJ(1), Genovés Crespo M(2), Cruz Ruiz J(1), Godoy Mayoral 
R(1), Agustín Martínez FJ(1), Martínez García AJ(3), Tárraga López PJ(4).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Respiratory Medicine , Albacete University Hospital , 
Albacete , Spain.
(2)b Department of Thoracic Surgery , Albacete University Hospital , Albacete , 
Spain.
(3)c Department of Respiratory Medicine , Hellin Hospital , Albacete , Spain.
(4)d Primary Care , Albacete University Hospital , Albacete , Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a respiratory 
problem with the highest prevalence and strongest socio-economic impact in the 
world and whose morbimortality keeps increasing. Treating this disease is a 
challenge in the field of pneumology since the market now offers a wide range of 
bronchodilators. Tiotropium bromide, a long acting beta agonists 
bronchodilator, is a drug used to deal with this pathology.
AREAS COVERED: The UPLIFT study was a 4-year (2004-2008) clinical multi-center 
trial in which tiotropium bromide was compared with a placebo. We present a 
bibliographic resume covering the multiple sub-analyses published since the end 
of the clinical trial, between 2009-2015. These sub-analyses analyzed the 
results obtained in UPLIFT in parallel, provided additional data about safety 
profiles, exacerbations, hospitalization and mortality rates, and lung function, 
among others. Expert Commentary: Tiotropium bromide is a significant advance for 
the maintenance treatment of patients with COPD. The favorable results obtained 
leave the door open to the possibility of improving the natural history of COPD 
and confirmed tiotropium bromide as the gold standard drug as monotherapy for 
treatment of COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2016.1188693
PMID: 27176208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2019 Apr;12(4):293-298. doi: 
10.1080/17512433.2019.1587292. Epub 2019 Mar 22.

Revefenacin for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Li F(1), Yang J(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Endocrinology , Central Hospital of Linyi City , Yishui 
Shandong , China.
(2)b Department of Pharmaceutical , Central Hospital of Linyi City , Yishui , 
Shandong , China.

Acetylcholine is the predominant parasympathetic neurotransmitter in the 
airways, and plays a key role in the pathophysiology of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Muscarinic receptors are found in smooth muscle cells 
and submucosal glands. Binding of acetylcholine to muscarinic receptors could 
trigger bronchoconstriction. Muscarinic antagonists prevent acetylcholine from 
binding to its receptors and produce bronchodilation. Revefenacin is the first 
once-daily dosed nebulized long acting muscarinic antagonist indicated for the 
maintenance treatment of patients with COPD. Areas covered: In this paper, the 
chemical properties, mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy 
and safety of Revefenacin was introduced, and the evolution of muscarinic 
antagonists is also briefly described. Expert commentary: Revefenacin is a new 
M3 muscarinic receptor antagonist, which could prevent acetylcholine from 
binding with the muscarinic receptor, making bronchodilation and relieving COPD 
symptoms. Revefenacin has a rapid onset of action, and the curative effect is to 
maintain a long time. Clinical trials showed that Revefenacin could 
significantly increase forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) in patients with 
COPD and improve their quality of life. The recommended dose of Revefenacin 
inhalation solution is 175 μg once daily. Adverse reactions were mild and the 
drug was well tolerated.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2019.1587292
PMID: 30803279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Respir Med. 2018 Sep;142:73-80. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.07.009. Epub 2018 Jul 
17.

Clinical characteristics and medication patterns in patients with COPD prior to 
initiation of triple therapy with ICS/LAMA/LABA: A retrospective study.

Bogart M(1), Stanford RH(2), Reinsch T(3), Hull M(4), Buikema A(5), Hulbert 
E(6).

Author information:
(1)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, 
NC, 27709-3398, USA. Electronic address: michael.r.bogart@gsk.com.
(2)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, 
NC, 27709-3398, USA. Electronic address: richard.h.stanford@gsk.com.
(3)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, 
NC, 27709-3398, USA; Division of Pharmaceutical Outcomes and Policy, University 
of North Carolina, 010 Beard Hall, CB 7573, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. 
Electronic address: tyler.k.reinsch@gsk.com.
(4)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum LifeSciences, 11000 Optum 
Circle, MN101-E300, Eden Prairie, MN, 55344, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.hull@optum.com.
(5)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum LifeSciences, 11000 Optum 
Circle, MN101-E300, Eden Prairie, MN, 55344, USA. Electronic address: 
ami.buikema@optum.com.
(6)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum LifeSciences, 11000 Optum 
Circle, MN101-E300, Eden Prairie, MN, 55344, USA. Electronic address: 
erin.hulbert@optum.com.

BACKGROUND: This study assessed patient-level characteristics and patterns of 
medication use in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
before initiation of multiple inhaler triple therapy (MITT; long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid 
[ICS/LAMA/LABA] combination).
METHODS: This retrospective study was conducted using the Optum Research 
Database. Patients enrolled in commercial or Medicare Advantage Prescription 
Drug plans, with a COPD diagnosis and >1 prescription for a COPD medication 
between January 2014 and March 2016 were included. The dispensing date for the 
first pharmacy prescription completing MITT with at least 1 day of overlap was 
the patient's index date. The 12 months prior to this date were used to assess 
patient characteristics, exacerbations, eosinophil counts and changes in 
medication.
RESULTS: The study population comprised 13,701 patients. At the index date, most 
patients were using a LAMA (n = 13,353 [97.5%]) and combination ICS/LABA 
(n = 13,292 [97.0%]) MITT. Overall, 90.4% of patients used a LABA, LAMA, 
LAMA/LABA, or ICS/LABA or had a moderate or severe exacerbation at any time 
during the baseline period, indicating that approximately 10% of patients 
initiated MITT without prior bronchodilator use or exacerbation history. Over 
65% of patients with an eosinophil measurement had a value ≥ 150 cells/μL.
CONCLUSION: Overall, it appears that in this patient population, ICS/LAMA/LABA 
as triple therapy is being initiated after use of a bronchodilator and/or after 
an exacerbation event, in accordance with accepted treatment recommendations.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.07.009
PMID: 30170806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Dec 22;12:73-83. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S122013. eCollection 2017.

Initiation of triple therapy maintenance treatment among patients with COPD in 
the US.

Simeone JC(1), Luthra R(2), Kaila S(2), Pan X(1), Bhagnani TD(1), Liu J(1), 
Wilcox TK(1).

Author information:
(1)Real-World Evidence, Evidera, Waltham, MA.
(2)HEOR Value Demonstration Team, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 
Ridgefield, CT, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
recommends triple therapy (long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists, 
long-acting beta-2 agonists, and inhaled corticosteroids) for patients with only 
the most severe COPD. Data on the proportion of COPD patients on triple therapy 
and their characteristics are sparse and dated. Objective 1 of this study was to 
estimate the proportion of all, and all treated, COPD patients receiving triple 
therapy. Objective 2 was to characterize those on triple therapy and assess the 
concordance of triple therapy use with GOLD guidelines.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective study used claims from the IMS 
PharMetrics Plus database from 2009 to 2013. Cohort 1 was selected to assess 
Objective 1 only; descriptive analyses were conducted in Cohort 2 to answer 
Objective 2. A validated claims-based algorithm and severity and frequency of 
exacerbations were used as proxies for COPD severity.
RESULTS: Of all 199,678 patients with COPD in Cohort 1, 7.5% received triple 
therapy after diagnosis, and 25.5% of all treated patients received triple 
therapy. In Cohort 2, 30,493 COPD patients (mean age =64.7 years) who initiated 
triple therapy were identified. Using the claims-based algorithm, 34.5% of 
Cohort 2 patients were classified as having mild disease (GOLD 1), 40.8% 
moderate (GOLD 2), 22.5% severe (GOLD 3), and 2.3% very severe (GOLD 4). Using 
exacerbation severity and frequency, 60.6% of patients were classified as GOLD 
1/2 and 39.4% as GOLD 3/4.
CONCLUSION: In this large US claims database study, one-quarter of all treated 
COPD patients received triple therapy. Although triple therapy is recommended 
for the most severe COPD patients, spirometry is infrequently assessed, and a 
majority of the patients who receive triple therapy may have only mild/moderate 
disease. Any potential overprescribing of triple therapy may lead to unnecessary 
costs to the patient and health care system.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S122013
PMCID: PMC5191839
PMID: 28053518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Boehringer Ingelheim, Inc. provided the funding 
for this study. RL and SK are salaried employees of Boehringer Ingelheim. JCS, 
TDB, JL, and TKW are currently employees of Evidera, which provides consulting 
and other research services to pharmaceutical, device, and other organizations. 
In their salaried positions, they work with a variety of companies and 
organizations and are precluded from receiving payment or honoraria directly 
from these organizations for services rendered. Evidera received funding from 
Boehringer Ingelheim for work on the project and the manuscript. XP was an 
employee of Evidera during the conduct of this study and the writing of this 
manuscript; she is currently employed by Sunovion Pharmaceuticals, Marlborough, 
MA. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


216. Drug Discov Today. 2016 Nov;21(11):1820-1827. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2016.07.009. 
Epub 2016 Jul 21.

Triple inhaled therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Montuschi P(1), Malerba M(2), Macis G(3), Mores N(4), Santini G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Agostino 
Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Electronic 
address: pmontuschi@rm.unicatt.it.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Department of Radiological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital 
Agostino Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Agostino 
Gemelli, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.

Combining individual drugs in a single inhaler is the most convenient way to 
deliver triple therapy. A long acting muscarinic receptor antagonist (LAMA) 
added to an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting beta-adrenoceptor agonist 
(LABA) fixed-dose combination (FDC) can improve efficacy of pharmacological 
treatment of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). New 
inhaled ICS/LABA/LAMA FDCs, including fluticasone 
furoate/vilanterol/umeclidinium, budesonide/formoterol/glycopyrronium and 
beclometasone/formoterol/glycopyrronium, are in Phase III of clinical 
development for COPD. Triple inhaled therapy might be particularly useful in 
patients with severe to very severe COPD, above all in those with peripheral 
blood or sputum eosinophilia, asthma-COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS) or frequent 
exacerbators. Future prospective studies should assess efficacy and safety of 
triple ICS/LABA/LAMA therapy in selected COPD phenotypes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2016.07.009
PMID: 27452453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Nov 25;11:2885-2895. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S118867. eCollection 2016.

Randomized controlled trials and real-world observational studies in evaluating 
cardiovascular safety of inhaled bronchodilator therapy in COPD.

Kardos P(1), Worsley S(2), Singh D(3), Román-Rodríguez M(4), Newby DE(5), 
Müllerová H(2).

Author information:
(1)Group Practice and Respiratory, Allergy and Sleep Unit, Red Cross Maingau 
Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)GSK, Stockley Park, Middlesex.
(3)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of 
South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(4)Primary Care Respiratory Research Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
de Palma IdisPa, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(5)BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science, University of Edinburgh, The Queen's 
Medical Research Institute, Edinburgh, UK.

long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) or long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) 
bronchodilators and their combination are recommended for the maintenance 
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Although the efficacy 
of LAMAs and LABAs has been well established through randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs), questions remain regarding their cardiovascular (CV) safety. 
Furthermore, while the safety of LAMA and LABA monotherapy has been extensively 
studied, data are lacking for LAMA/LABA combination therapy, and the majority of 
the studies that have reported on the CV safety of LAMA/LABA combination therapy 
were not specifically designed to assess this. Evaluation of CV safety for COPD 
treatments is important because many patients with COPD have underlying CV 
comorbidities. However, severe CV and other comorbidities are often exclusion 
criteria for RCTs, contributing to a lack in external validity and 
generalizability. Real-world observational studies are another important tool to 
evaluate the effectiveness and safety of COPD therapies in a broader population 
of patients and can improve upon the external validity limitations of RCTs. We 
examine what is already known regarding the CV and cerebrovascular safety of 
LAMA/LABA combination therapy from RCTs and real-world observational studies, 
and explore the advantages and limitations of data derived from each study type. 
We also describe an ongoing prospective, observational, comparative 
post-authorization safety study of a LAMA/LABA combination therapy 
(umeclidinium/vilanterol) and LAMA monotherapy (umeclidinium) versus tiotropium, 
with a focus on the relative merits of the study design.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S118867
PMCID: PMC5135074
PMID: 27932872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DEN has received sponsorship to attend 
international meetings, honoraria for lecturing or attending advisory boards and 
research grants from various pharmaceutical companies including AstraZeneca, 
BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Novartis, and Pfizer. DS has received 
sponsorship to attend international meetings, honoraria for lecturing or 
attending advisory boards and research grants from various pharmaceutical 
companies including Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
Genentech, GSK, Glenmark, Johnson & Johnson, Merck, NAPP, Novartis, Pfizer, 
Skyepharma, Takeda, Teva, Theravance, and Verona. MR-R has received sponsorship 
to attend international meetings, honoraria for lecturing or attending advisory 
boards and research grants from various pharmaceutical companies including 
Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, Mundipharma, Novartis, 
Pfizer, ROVI, and Teva. PK received honoraria for lecturing and advisory boards 
from the following pharmaceutical companies: AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Menarini, Mundipharma, Novartis, Roche, Takeda, and Teva; and 
sponsorship for German national and international conferences from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Menarini, and Novartis. SW and HM are employees of GSK and 
hold stocks/shares in GSK. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


218. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jun 4;10:1053-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S79864. 
eCollection 2015.

The reasons for triple therapy in stable COPD patients in Japanese clinical 
practice.

Miyazaki M(1), Nakamura H(2), Takahashi S(1), Chubachi S(1), Sasaki M(1), 
Haraguchi M(1), Terai H(1), Ishii M(1), Fukunaga K(1), Tasaka S(1), Soejima 
K(1), Asano K(3), Betsuyaku T(1); Keio COPD Comorbidity Research (K-CCR) group.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan ; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama 
Medical University, Saitama, Japan.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Tokai University 
School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Triple combination therapy involving long acting muscarinic 
antagonists long-acting beta agonists, and inhaled corticosteroids has recently 
become an option for maintenance treatment of COPD. Some add-on clinical trials 
have reported the benefits of these combinations. However, the process to step 
up to triple therapy varies for individual cases.
METHODS: Keio University and affiliated hospitals conducted an observational 
COPD cohort study, recruiting patients diagnosed as having COPD by pulmonary 
physicians and those referred for investigation of possible COPD. Their 
prescription history and clinical course were retrospectively analyzed based on 
the physicians' medical records and patient questionnaires. This study was 
registered with UMIN (UMIN000003470, April 10, 2010).
RESULTS: A total of 95 of the 445 COPD patients (21%) were treated with inhaled 
corticosteroids/long-acting beta agonists/long acting muscarinic antagonists as 
maintenance therapy, including 12 in COPD Grade I, 31 in Grade II, 38 in Grade 
III, and 14 in Grade IV, based on the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease spirometric grading. For more than half of the patients on triple 
therapy, the treatment had been intensified due to unsatisfactory improvement of 
symptoms, and 32% were treated with triple therapy due to comorbid asthma. In 
contrast, there were COPD patients whose therapy was maintained after starting 
with triple therapy because of their serious conditions or concurrent 
exacerbation at diagnosis (8%).
CONCLUSION: Triple therapy was often prescribed in the real-life management of 
COPD, even in patients whose airflow limitation was not severe. To better 
control symptoms was the major reason for choosing triple therapy, regardless of 
the severity of COPD, in Japan.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S79864
PMCID: PMC4461139
PMID: 26082629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev. 2015 Jun;22(2):103-11. doi: 
10.1007/s40292-015-0078-3. Epub 2015 Feb 6.

Strategies for reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ferri C(1).

Author information:
(1)MeSVA Department, University of L'Aquila, Delta 6 Bldg, 67100, Coppito, 
L'Aquila, Italy, claudio.ferri@cc.univaq.it.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is frequently accompanied by 
multimorbidities in affected patients. Even though the majority of these 
comorbidities are also related to advanced age and cigarette smoke, also COPD 
itself has significant impact on insurgence, or worsening of these conditions. 
As a consequence, COPD is regarded as a complex disease with pulmonary and 
extra-pulmonary involvement. According to current guidelines for the management 
of COPD patients, the comprehensive treatment of this condition should target 
respiratory symptoms as well as comorbidities. Cardiovascular disease is one of 
the most frequent comorbidities in COPD patients and there are several 
strategies for reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease in COPD patients. 
These include smoking cessation, pharmacologic prevention of cardiovascular 
disease, and the treatment of COPD. Beta-blockers for the prevention of 
cardiovascular disease have been traditionally limited in COPD patients, albeit 
current evidence supporting their efficacy and safety in these patients. With 
regard to COPD medications, corticosteroids are generally not recommended, 
except for exacerbations, while long-acting beta2-agonists have demonstrated an 
acceptable profile of cardiovascular safety. long acting beta agonists 
bronchodilators, in particular tiotropium in the mist inhaler formulation, have 
been associated with an increased risk of major cardiovascular events and 
mortality. Data on this issue remain, however, controversial. Glycopyrronium, a 
recently introduced anticholinergic, demonstrated. a rapid and sustained relief 
of respiratory symptoms with a favorable safety profile and no increase in 
cardiovascular risk, in monotherapy and in combination with a long-acting 
beta2-agonist in a comprehensive trial program indicating a valid option for 
COPD patients with CV comorbidities.

DOI: 10.1007/s40292-015-0078-3
PMID: 25655487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2016 Oct;14(5):579-94. doi: 
10.1007/s40258-016-0256-z.

Cost Effectiveness of the Long-Acting beta-Adrenergic Agonist (LABA)/Long-Acting 
Muscarinic Antagonist Dual Bronchodilator Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium Versus the 
LABA/Inhaled Corticosteroid Combination Salmeterol/Fluticasone in Patients with 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Analyses Conducted for Canada, France, 
Italy, and Portugal.

Reza Maleki-Yazdi M(1), Molimard M(2), Keininger DL(3), Gruenberger JB(3), 
Carrasco J(4), Pitotti C(5), Sauvage E(6), Chehab S(7), Price D(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Women's College Hospital, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. maleki.pccrc@on.aibn.com.
(2)Department of Medical Pharmacology, CHU and University of Bordeaux, 33076, 
Bordeaux Cedex, France.
(3)Primary Care Franchise, Novartis Pharma AG, Postfach, 4002, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(4)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Novartis Farma-Produtos Farmacêuticos 
SA., Paço de Arcos, Portugal.
(5)Health Economics, Novartis Farma S.p.A., Largo Umberto Boccioni 1, 21041, 
Origgio, VA, Italy.
(6)Strategy Pricing, Novartis Pharma S.A.S., 2-4, rue Lionel Terray, BP 308, 
92506, Rueil-Malmaison Cedex, France.
(7)Health Policy and Patient Access, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc., 385, 
boulev. Bouchard, CDN-Dorval, Quebec, H9S 1A9, Canada.
(8)Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of 
Aberdeen, Polwarth Building, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the cost effectiveness of 
the dual bronchodilator indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) compared with 
salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC) in patients with moderate-to-severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who had a history of one or no 
exacerbations in the previous year, in Canada, France, Italy, and Portugal.
METHODS: A patient-level simulation was developed to compare the costs and 
outcomes of IND/GLY versus SFC based on data from the LANTERN trial 
(NCT01709903). Monte-Carlo simulation methods were employed to follow individual 
patients over various time horizons. Population and efficacy inputs were derived 
from the LANTERN trial. Considering the payers' perspective, only direct costs 
were included. Costs and health outcomes were discounted annually at 3.0 % for 
all countries. Unit costs were taken from publically available sources with all 
costs converted to euros (€). The cost base year was 2015. Deterministic and 
probabilistic sensitivity analyses were undertaken to test the robustness of the 
model results.
RESULTS: IND/GLY was found to be the dominant (more effective and less costly) 
treatment option compared with SFC in all four countries. The use of IND/GLY was 
associated with mean total cost savings per patient over a lifetime of €6202, 
€1974, €1611, and €220 in Canada, France, Italy, and Portugal, respectively. 
Sensitivity analysis showed that exacerbation rates had the largest impact on 
incremental costs and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs). The probability of 
IND/GLY being cost effective was estimated to be >95 % for thresholds above 
€5000/QALY.
CONCLUSION: In patients with moderate to severe COPD, IND/GLY is likely to be a 
cost-effective treatment alternative compared with SFC.

DOI: 10.1007/s40258-016-0256-z
PMID: 27516088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Dec 18;14:27-37. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S184808. eCollection 2019.

Efficacy and safety of a novel, nebulized glycopyrrolate for the treatment of 
COPD: effect of baseline disease severity and age; pooled analysis of GOLDEN 3 
and GOLDEN 4.

Ohar J(1), Tosiello R(2), Goodin T(2), Sanjar S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC, USA, johar@wakehealth.edu.
(2)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., Marlborough, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy and safety of nebulized glycopyrrolate inhalation 
solution (GLY), administered twice daily (BID) via the innovative eFlow® Closed 
System nebulizer (PARI Pharma GmbH, Starnberg, Germany), were demonstrated in 
two replicate, placebo-controlled, 12-week Phase III studies (GOLDEN 3 and 
GOLDEN 4). This report evaluates the efficacy and safety of GLY by baseline 
disease severity and age in the pooled GOLDEN 3 and GOLDEN 4 patient population 
(N=1,294).
METHODS: Patients were grouped by baseline predicted post-bronchodilator FEV1 
(<50%, ≥50%) and age (<65, ≥65, ≥75 years).
RESULTS: GLY (25 and 50 μg BID) produced significant improvements in trough FEV1 
in FEV1% predicted <50% (0.070 L, 0.079 L) and ≥50% (0.112 L, 0.126 L) subgroups 
(P<0.01 vs placebo), and in patients aged <65 (0.056 L, 0.086 L), ≥65 (0.140 L, 
0.124 L), and ≥75 (0.144 L, 0.120 L) years (P<0.05 vs placebo). St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score was significantly improved with GLY 
25 and 50 μg BID (P<0.05 vs placebo) in FEV1% predicted <50% (-3.237, -3.061) 
and ≥50% (-3.392, -2.322) and in <65 years (-3.447, -2.318) and ≥65 years 
(-3.053, -3.098) subgroups. In patients aged ≥75 years, GLY 25 μg reduced SGRQ 
total score by -6.278 units (P<0.01 vs placebo). The incidence of 
treatment-emergent adverse events was similar between GLY and placebo across all 
subgroups, and the overall incidence of cardiovascular events was low.
CONCLUSIONS: Nebulized GLY improved lung function and health status and was well 
tolerated over 12 weeks in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD, 
irrespective of baseline disease severity and age.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02347761, NCT02347774.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S184808
PMCID: PMC6305132
PMID: 30587959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Jill Ohar has served on advisory 
boards for Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Mylan, and Theravance, and has provided expert 
witness testimony for: Wallace & Graham, Levy Konigsberg, Goldenberg Heller & 
Antognoli, Simon Greensone Panatier Bartlett, Williams Kherkher Hart, Gori 
Julian & Associates, Simmons Hanley Conroy, and Elrod Pope. Robert Tosiello, 
Thomas Goodin, and Shahin Sanjar are employees of Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


222. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Nov 28;13:3867-3877. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S177097. eCollection 2018.

Cost-effectiveness of twice-daily indacaterol/glycopyrrolate inhalation powder 
for the treatment of moderate to severe COPD in the US.

Rajagopalan K(1), Bloudek L(2), Marvel J(3), Dembek C(1), Kavati A(3).

Author information:
(1)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., Marlborough, MA 01752, USA, 
carole.dembek@sunovion.com.
(2)Curta Inc., Seattle, WA 98116, USA.
(3)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ 07936, USA.

BACKGROUND: Indacaterol 27.5 µg/glycopyrrolate 15.6 µg (IND/GLY 27.5/15.6 µg) 
inhalation powder, a twice-daily, fixed-dose combination of a long-acting 
beta2-agonist (LABA) and a long-acting antimuscarinic antagonist (LAMA), is 
indicated in the US for long-term maintenance treatment of airflow obstruction 
in patients with COPD. The safety and efficacy of IND/GLY 27.5/15.6 µg have been 
established, but cost-effectiveness is not yet known. This study compared the 
cost-effectiveness of IND/GLY 27.5/15.6 µg with other long-acting COPD 
maintenance therapies.
METHODS: A Markov model was constructed from the US payer perspective. Health 
states were defined as mild (post-bronchodilator FEV1 ≥80% of predicted), 
moderate (50% ≤FEV1 <80% of predicted), severe (30% ≤FEV1 <50% of predicted), 
and very severe (FEV1 <30% of predicted) COPD. Patients entering the model 
transitioned through health states based on placebo-adjusted change from 
baseline in trough FEV1 for each comparator at week 12. Comparators included 
other US Food and Drug Administration-approved LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations 
as well as commonly prescribed LAMA and LABA/inhaled corticosteroid agents. 
One-way and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were conducted to test the model 
assumptions and the overall robustness of the results.
RESULTS: Using the model, IND/GLY 27.5/15.6 µg treatment for 12 weeks resulted 
in total costs of US $23,375 vs US $9,365 for placebo. Compared with placebo, 
IND/GLY 27.5/15.6 treatment resulted in the highest improvement in FEV1 across 
all comparators and the lowest cost per decline in 100 mL FEV1. IND/GLY 
27.5/15.6 µg was also among the most cost-effective treatment option as measured 
by St George's Respiratory Questionnaire response rate, at US $3,518 per 
additional responder at 12 weeks compared with placebo. In addition, IND/GLY 
27.5/15.6 µg had the lowest cost per severe exacerbation avoided vs placebo 
across all comparators (US $87,686).
CONCLUSION: This model, developed from the US payer perspective with a 5-year 
time horizon, found IND/GLY 27.5/15.6 µg to be a cost-effective treatment option 
for patients with moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S177097
PMCID: PMC6276826
PMID: 30568438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure KR was an employee of Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals Inc at the time the study was conducted. CD is an employee of 
Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc. JM and AK are employees of Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals Corporation. LB was an employee of Xcenda LLC when the study was 
conducted. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


223. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Mar 6;12:793-801. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S125564. eCollection 2017.

Inhaled treatment of COPD: a Delphi consensus statement.

Ninane V(1), Corhay JL(2), Germonpré P(3), Janssens W(4), Joos GF(5), Liistro 
G(6), Vincken W(7), Gurdain S(8), Vanvlasselaer E(8), Lehouck A(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saint-Pierre Hospital, Université Libre 
de Bruxelles, Brussels.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, CHU, Liege.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, AZ Maria Middelares, Ghent.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Katholieke Universiteit, Leuven.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospitals Saint-Luc, Brussels.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Brussels, Brussels.
(8)Medical Department, Novartis Pharma, Vilvoorde, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) global 
strategy (2015) provides guidance for the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) with different first-choice options per GOLD category 
without specification.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the level of medical experts' consensus on their 
preferred first-choice treatment within different COPD categories.
METHODS: A two-round Delphi Panel consisting of 15 questions was completed by 
Belgian pulmonologists (n=31) and European (n=10) COPD experts.
RESULTS: Good consensus was reached by both expert groups for long-acting 
bronchodilators instead of short-acting bronchodilators as first-choice 
treatment in GOLD A. Single bronchodilation with long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) was preferred over long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) and LABA/LAMA 
as first-choice treatment in GOLD B and GOLD C. For GOLD D patients based on the 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)<50%, a very good consensus was 
reached for LAMA/LABA as first-choice treatment. For GOLD D patients based on 
frequent or severe exacerbations, there was a good consensus for 
LABA/LAMA/inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) as first choice in the Belgian group. 
According to the European experts, both LABA/LAMA and LABA/LAMA/ICS could be the 
first choice for these patients.
CONCLUSION: Belgian and European experts recommend long-acting bronchodilators 
as first-choice treatment. Treatment containing ICS was found only appropriate 
in patients with FEV1<50% and ≥2 moderate exacerbations or 1 severe 
exacerbation/year.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S125564
PMCID: PMC5345984
PMID: 28293106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure VN has been on advisory boards for 
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), AstraZeneca (AZ), Novartis (N), and Boehringer Ingelheim 
(BI). PG received fees for attending advisory board from N, AZ, GSK, and BI. He 
also received educational grant from Chiesi (C). WJ has been on advisory boards 
and has accepted lecture fees from GSK, AZ, N, C and BI. GFJ has been on 
advisory boards or has accepted fees for lecture from GSK, AZ, N, C, BI, 
Mundipharma, Sandoz and Teva. GL has been on advisory boards for N, BI, and C. 
WV has been on advisory board for N, GSK, AZ, BI, and C including travel 
expenses from BI. SG, and EV are both employees of N. JLC and AL declared no 
conflicts of interest. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


224. Am J Med. 2017 Nov;130(11):1251-1254. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.07.011. Epub 
2017 Jul 27.

New Treatment Option for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Two Long-Acting 
Bronchodilators in a Single Metered-Dose Inhaler.

Self TH(1), Ellingson S(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Methodist University Hospital, 
Memphis. Electronic address: tself@uthsc.edu.
(2)University of Tennessee Health Science Center, PGY2 Internal Medicine 
Pharmacy Residency, Methodist University Hospital, Memphis.

Erratum in
    Am J Med. 2017 Dec 12;:

Combination long-acting inhaled bronchodilators are central to the management of 
patients with moderate to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Glycopyrrolate is a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), and formoterol 
fumarate is a long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA). In randomized controlled trials, 
this LAMA/LABA combination in a metered-dose inhaler was shown to be effective 
in improving pulmonary function and quality of life. Clinicians now have the 
availability of 3 delivery systems for LAMA/LABA therapy, including metered-dose 
inhaler, dry-powder inhaler, and Soft Mist inhaler. On the basis of numerous 
patient factors, such as cognitive ability, manual strength/dexterity, and peak 
inspiratory flow, clinicians may select the most appropriate inhalation device. 
For each inhalation device, persistent patient education is absolutely 
essential, including observation of patient use. International evidence-based 
guidelines stress the critical importance of ensuring correct use of inhalation 
devices.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.07.011
PMID: 28757318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;13:1753466619843426. doi: 
10.1177/1753466619843426.

The once-daily fixed-dose combination of olodaterol and tiotropium in the 
management of COPD: current evidence and future prospects.

Derom E(1), Brusselle GG(2), Joos GF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ingang 12, 
Route 1404, Corneel Heymanslaan 10, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium.

Long-acting bronchodilators are the cornerstone of pharmacologic treatment of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Spiolto® or Stiolto® is a 
fixed-dose combination (FDC) containing two long-acting bronchodilators, the 
long acting muscarinic receptor antagonist tiotropium (TIO) and the long-acting 
beta-adrenoceptor agonist olodaterol (OLO), formulated in the Respimat® Soft Mist™ 
inhaler. A total of 13 large, multicentre studies of up to 52 weeks' duration 
have documented its efficacy in more than 15,000 patients with COPD. TIO/OLO 
5/5 µg FDC significantly increases pulmonary function compared with placebo and 
its respective constituent mono-components TIO 5 µg and OLO 5 µg. TIO/OLO 5/5 µg 
also results in statistically and clinically significant improvements in 
patient-reported outcomes, such as dyspnoea, use of rescue medication, and 
health status. Addition of OLO 5 µg to TIO 5 µg reduces the rate of 
moderate-to-severe exacerbations by approximately 10%. Compared with placebo and 
TIO 5 µg, TIO/OLO 5/5 µg significantly improves exercise capacity (e.g. 
endurance time) and physical activity, the latter increase being reached by a 
unique combination behavioural modification intervention, dual bronchodilatation 
and exercise training. Overall, the likelihood for patients to experience a 
clinically significant benefit is higher with TIO/OLO 5/5 µg than with its 
constituent mono-components, which usually yield smaller improvements which do 
not always reach statistical significance, compared with baseline or placebo. 
This supports the early introduction of TIO/OLO 5/5 µg in the management of 
patients with symptomatic COPD.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466619843426
PMCID: PMC6475840
PMID: 31002020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: ED’s clinical 
department has received financial support from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK 
and Novartis to perform clinical studies. He has participated in advisory boards 
for Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, GSK, Novartis and Astra Zeneca, for 
which a fee was given to the clinical department. He has received travel grants 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK and AstraZeneca to attend international 
congresses. He has received speaker’s fees (given to the clinical department) 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Chiesi, Astra Zeneca and Novartis to give 
scientific presentations to local general practitioner groups and 
pulmonologists.


226. Ugeskr Laeger. 2018 Jun 18;180(25):V11170855.

[Treatment of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Danish]

Løkke A(1), Nielsen LP, Moberg M, Marså K, Titlestad IL, Kofod LM, Godtfredsen 
NS.

Author information:
(1)aloekke@gmail.com.

In 2012, The Danish Society of Respiratory Medicine gave birth to their most 
recent guideline regarding chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Much 
has happened since, and in late 2017 an update has been published. Chapters have 
been deleted, and new ones added. The major alteration has been in the section 
concerning treatment with inhalation medication - now aiming at an easy stepwise 
up-titration of long-acting medicine as well as a guide of how to down-titrate 
inhaled corticosteroids. This review mainly focuses on how to treat stable COPD 
according to The Danish Society of Respiratory Medicine.

PMID: 29938633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 Feb;16(3):427-34. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.2015.1000861.

Aclidinium bromide plus formoterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Lal C(1), Strange C.

Author information:
(1)Medical University of South Carolina, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, Department 
of Pulmonary, Critical Care , 96 Jonathan Lucas Street, CSB 812, Msc 630, 
Charleston, SC 29425 , USA +1 843 792 7776 ; +1 843 876 2057 ; lalch@musc.edu.

Erratum in
    Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 Apr;16(6):939.

INTRODUCTION: Drugs that target dynamic hyperinflation such as long-acting β-2 
agonists and long-acting antimuscarinic antagonists form a cornerstone of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) management. The idea of combining 
these two medications in a single formulation, which may potentially improve 
patient compliance, is novel and attractive.
AREAS COVERED: The pharmacologic profiles of aclidinium bromide and formoterol 
fumarate are discussed. However, studies to define drug interactions and 
alterations in the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of the fixed dose 
combination (FDC) of aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate in large populations 
remain unpublished. Results of Phase II and two Phase III pivotal trials, 
ACLIFORM/COPD and AUGMENT COPD, evaluating the FDC are discussed.
EXPERT OPINION: Initial data for the aclidinium/formoterol inhaler appears to be 
promising for impacting the lung function. To define if this benefit translates 
into improved long-term outcomes of decreased exacerbation frequency, improved 
quality of life and decreased disease-specific mortality are important. The 
introduction of this combination will likely have a significant impact on the 
prescribing habits of physicians across the world.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1000861
PMID: 25597386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jun 15;12:1753-1763. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S136314. eCollection 2017.

Treatment trends in patients with asthma-COPD overlap syndrome in a COPD cohort: 
findings from a real-world survey.

Ding B(1), Small M(2).

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.
(2)Adelphi Real World, Bollington, Macclesfield, UK.

BACKGROUND: Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap 
syndrome (ACOS) is an increasingly recognized phenotype. Few randomized clinical 
trials have been conducted in patients with ACOS; therefore, scientific evidence 
concerning ACOS is scarce and a therapeutic approach remains unclear. The aim of 
this study was to evaluate current treatment trends for patients with ACOS, 
identified as those with a dual definition of asthma and COPD, in a real-world 
COPD cohort.
METHODS: Data were analyzed from patients with asthma and COPD in the USA, 
France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the UK who participated in the 2012 and 2013 
Adelphi Respiratory Disease Specific Programmes (DSPs). Patients with ACOS were 
identified in the COPD population; these patients had a physician-confirmed, 
concomitant asthma diagnosis. Physicians completed a patient record form 
providing information on patient and disease characteristics including 
prescribed respiratory treatment. Pairwise comparisons were made between the 
ACOS, asthma, and COPD populations using χ2 tests.
RESULTS: In total, 9,042 patients with asthma-only, 7,119 patients with 
COPD-only, and 523 patients with ACOS (a dual diagnosis of asthma and COPD) 
participated in the study. The most commonly prescribed regimens were inhaled 
corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist (ICS/LABA) + long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA); (ACOS 30%, asthma 1.4%, and COPD 32%), ICS/LABA (19%, 41.5%, 
and 17%, respectively), and LAMA (6%, 0.4%, and 19%, respectively); 18% of 
patients with ACOS were not prescribed an ICS. Patients with ACOS had a 
significantly higher incidence of gastroesophageal reflux disease, diabetes, and 
obesity and experienced more exacerbations in the past year than those with COPD 
or asthma.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of patients with ACOS, as defined in this research, 
were prescribed similar treatment to those with COPD. There is a need, however, 
for better treatment for patients with ACOS, as indicated by symptoms and 
exacerbation levels. A clearer therapeutic approach for patients with ACOS is 
required.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S136314
PMCID: PMC5479265
PMID: 28670116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure BD is an employee of AstraZeneca. MS 
is an employee of Adelphi Real World. The authors report no other conflicts of 
interest in this work.


229. JAMA. 2016 Apr 5;315(13):1378-93. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.2654.

Screening for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Evidence Report and 
Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force.

Guirguis-Blake JM(1), Senger CA(2), Webber EM(2), Mularski RA(2), Whitlock 
EP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle2Kaiser 
Permanente Research Affiliates Evidence-based Practice Center, Portland, Oregon.
(2)Kaiser Permanente Research Affiliates Evidence-based Practice Center, 
Portland, Oregon3Center for Health Research, Kaiser Permanente Northwest, 
Portland, Oregon.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2016 Apr 5;315(13):1343-4.

IMPORTANCE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the third leading 
cause of death in the United States.
OBJECTIVE: To systematically review literature on the accuracy of screening 
questionnaires and office-based screening pulmonary function testing and the 
efficacy and harms of treatment of screen-detected COPD.
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE, PubMed, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled 
Trials for relevant English-language studies published through January 2015.
STUDY SELECTION: Two reviewers independently screened abstracts and studies. The 
search yielded 13,141 unique citations; 465 full-text articles were reviewed, 
and 33 studies met the inclusion criteria.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Two reviewers rated the quality of each study 
using USPSTF criteria.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Diagnostic accuracy (sensitivity, specificity, 
positive predictive value [PPV], and negative predictive value [NPV]; treatment 
efficacy (COPD exacerbations, all-cause mortality, quality of life, and 
dyspnea); and treatment harms.
RESULTS: All screening questionnaires were based on symptoms as well as risk 
factors such as age and smoking history. The COPD Diagnostic Questionnaire was 
the most extensively studied (5 studies, n = 3048), with moderate overall 
performance for COPD detection: area under the receiver operating characteristic 
curve (AUC), 0.65 to 0.72; sensitivity, 80% to 93%; and specificity, 24% to 49%, 
at a threshold of greater than 16.5. Positive predictive value and NPV ranged 
from 17% to 45% and 76% to 98%, respectively. For pulmonary function-based 
screening tools, FEV1/FEV6 was the best studied (3 studies, n = 1587), with AUC 
ranging from 0.84 to 0.85. Sensitivity ranged from 51% to 80%. Specificity 
(range, 90%-95%) and PPV (range, 63%-75%) appeared better than questionnaires. 
There was not strong evidence to support that screening and supplying smokers 
with spirometry results improves smoking cessation rates. Treatment trials were 
unavailable for screen-detected patients. Trials that reported outcomes in 
patients with mild to moderate COPD included 2 trials of long-acting β-agonists 
(LABAs) (n = 3174), 1 RCT of LABAs and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) (n = 1097), 
5 RCTs of the long acting muscarinic antagonist tiotropium (n = 4592), and 6 
RCTs of ICS (n = 3983). They suggested no benefit in all-cause mortality, but a 
decrease in annual rates of exacerbations with pharmacologic treatments. Few 
trials reported harms for any individual drug class. Adverse effects were 
generally mild (eg, dry mouth and cough).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: There was no direct evidence available to determine 
the benefits and harms of screening asymptomatic adults for COPD using 
questionnaires or office-based screening pulmonary function testing or to 
determine the benefits of treatment in screen-detected populations. Indirect 
evidence suggests that the COPD Diagnostic Questionnaire has moderate overall 
performance for COPD detection. Among patients with mild to moderate COPD, the 
benefit of pharmacotherapy for reducing exacerbations was modest.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2016.2654
PMID: 27046366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Lung. 2018 Feb;196(1):11-14. doi: 10.1007/s00408-017-0061-y. Epub 2017 Oct 14.

Tolerability of Bisoprolol on Domiciliary Spirometry in COPD.

Jabbal S(1), Lipworth BJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, Division of Molecular and Clinical 
Medicine, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, Scotland, DD1 9SY, UK.
(2)Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, Division of Molecular and Clinical 
Medicine, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, Scotland, DD1 9SY, UK. 
b.j.lipworth@dundee.ac.uk.

We investigated if serial domiciliary measures of spirometry were sensitive at 
detecting subtle effects of beta-2 blockade associated with bisoprolol in 
(n = 17) patients with COPD. After a two-week run in on inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS) and long acting beta-2 agonist (LABA): beclometasone/formoterol 100/6 µg, 
patients' started additional a long acting muscarinic receptor antagonist: 
(LAMA) Tiotropium 18 µg, with concomitant weekly dose titration of bisoprolol: 
1.25-2.5-5 mg. After a further week of bisoprolol 5 mg, they were stepped back 
down to (ICS/LABA) for one week. Mean age was 64 years, mean FEV1 52% predicted, 
and mean FEV1/FVC ratio of 0.46. Compared to baseline am FEV1 of 1.38 L (95% CI 
1.14-1.61 L), both ICS/LABA/LAMA and ICS/LABA in conjunction with bisoprolol 
showed statistically significant mean falls of 100 ml (1.28 L, 95% CI 1.03-1.53 
L), and 120 ml, respectively (1.26 L, 95% CI 1.01-1.51 L); equalling and 
exceeding the MCID of 100 ml, respectively. These changes were disconnected from 
symptoms, reliever use and oxygen saturation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-017-0061-y
PMID: 29030687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Sep 28;13:3003-3009. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S177333. eCollection 2018.

Current appraisal of single inhaler triple therapy in COPD.

Lipworth B(1), Kuo CR(1), Jabbal S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular & Clinical Medicine, Scottish Centre for Respiratory 
Research, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of Dundee, Scotland, 
UK, b.j.lipworth@dundee.ac.uk.

A single inhaler containing inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting 
beta-agonist (LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) is a more 
convenient way of delivering triple therapy in patients with COPD. Single triple 
therapy has been shown to be superior at reducing exacerbations and improving 
quality of life compared to LABA/LAMA, especially in patients with a prior 
history of frequent exacerbations and blood eosinophilia, who have ICS 
responsive disease. The corollary is that patients with infrequent exacerbations 
who are noneosinophilic may be safely de-escalated from triple therapy to 
LABA/LAMA without loss of control. Pointedly, there is a substantially increased 
risk of pneumonia associated with the triple therapy containing fluticasone 
furoate but not beclometasone dipropionate or budesonide. Since triple therapy 
is also better than ICS/LABA at reducing exacerbations and improving lung 
function, symptoms, and quality of life, this brings into question the rationale 
for using ICS/LABA. Hence, we propose a simplified pragmatic decision process 
based on symptoms, prior to exacerbation history, and blood eosinophils to 
select which patients should be given a single triple inhaler or LABA/LAMA. 
Differences in patient preference of inhaler device, formulations and drugs will 
also determine which triple inhaler prescribers elect to use.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S177333
PMCID: PMC6167973
PMID: 30319248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr Lipworth reports grants and 
personal fees from AZ, personal fees and other from Teva, personal fees from 
Novartis, nonfinancial support from GSK, grants and personal fees from Chiesi, 
grants and personal fees from Boerhinger, during the conduct of the study; 
grants and personal fees from Meda/Mylan, grants from Janssen, grants from 
Roche, personal fees from Lupin, grants and personal fees from Boerhinger 
Ingelheim, grants and personal fees from Chiesi, personal fees from Cipla, 
personal fees from Sandoz, personal fees from Dr Reddys, grants and personal 
fees from Sanofi, personal fees from Circassia, outside the submitted work. Dr 
Kuo reports personal fees and nonfinancial support from Pfizer, outside the 
submitted work. Dr Jabbal reports personal fees and nonfinancial support from 
Chiesi Pharma, personal fees and nonfinancial support from Pfizer, nonfinancial 
support and other from Napp, personal fees and nonfinancial support from 
AstraZeneca, nonfinancial support from Teva, personal fees and nonfinancial 
support from Mylan, personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, outside the 
submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


232. Rev Med Liege. 2016 Jun;71(6):308-313.

[Spiolto Respimat® : tiotropium-olodaterol fixed combination for therapy of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Cataldo D(1).

Author information:
(1)Département des Sciences Biomédicales et Précliniques et Service de 
Pneumologie, ULG et CHU de Liège, Site du Sart Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgique.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a chronic airway disease that 
can be prevented and treated. The recommendations for therapy include 
bronchodilators from two classes (LAMA (Long Acting Muscarinic Antagonists) and 
LABA (Long Acting Beta2 Agonists)). Spiolto Respimat® is a LAMA/LABA combination 
therapy and comprises tiotropium (Spiriva®) and olodaterol (a LABA). Clinical 
studies show that Spiolto Respimat® is able to improve lung function tests 
(Increased FEV1, decreased hyperinflation and residual volume) and quality of 
life as compared to tiotropium or olodaterol. Studies also suggest that COPD 
exacerbations are decreased in patients treated by Spiolto Respimat® as compared 
to those treated with olodaterol (results of studies with exacerbations as 
primary outcome are not available yet). Safety of Spiolto Respimat® appears 
similar to tiotropium or olodaterol. Spiolto Respimat® indications is 
maintenance therapy for COPD. Reimbursement in Belgium requires that patients 
still display symptoms although already treated and that he/she has been 
previously treated by a LAMA.

Publisher: La bronchopneumopathie chronique obstructive (BPCO) est une maladie 
chronique des voies aériennes qui est évitable et soignable. Le schéma de prise 
en charge comprend, entre autres, la prescription de bronchodilatateurs de la 
classe des LAMA (Long Acting Muscarinic Antagonists) et des LABA (Long Acting 
Beta2 Agonists). Le Spiolto Respimat® combine le tiotropium (un LAMA 
commercialisé sous le nom de Spiriva®) et l’olodatérol qui est un LABA. Les 
études cliniques montrent que le Spiolto Respimat® permet d’améliorer les 
indices de fonction respiratoire (augmentation du VEMS, diminution de 
l’hyperinflation et du volume résiduel) et d’améliorer la qualité de vie par 
rapport au tiotropium ou à l’olodatérol utilisés seuls. Le nombre 
d’exacerbations de la BPCO est également moindre chez les patients traités par 
Spiolto Respimat® par rapport à un traitement par olodatérol en monothérapie, 
mais des études dédiées à l’observation des exacerbations sont actuellement 
toujours en cours. La sécurité d’utilisation du Spiolto Respimat® est similaire 
à celle des deux mono-composants. Le Spiolto Respimat® est indiqué pour le 
traitement d’entretien de patients atteints de BPCO. Il est remboursé en 
Belgique chez les patients qui restent symptomatiques dans le cadre de la BPCO 
et qui sont déjà traités par un LAMA.

PMID: 28383865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Respir Res. 2015 Aug 2;16(1):92. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0250-2.

Aclidinium bromide and formoterol fumarate as a fixed-dose combination in COPD: 
pooled analysis of symptoms and exacerbations from two six-month, multicentre, 
randomised studies (ACLIFORM and AUGMENT).

Bateman ED(1), Chapman KR(2), Singh D(3), D'Urzo AD(4), Molins E(5), Leselbaum 
A(6), Gil EG(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, 
George Street, Mowbray, 7700, Cape Town, South Africa. eric.bateman@uct.ac.za.
(2)Asthma & Airway Centre, University Health Network, Toronto Western Hospital, 
Toronto, ON, Canada. kchapman@ca.inter.net.
(3)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of 
South Manchester, Manchester, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(4)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada. tonydurzo@sympatico.ca.
(5)R&D Centre, AstraZeneca PLC (former employee of Almirall S.A.), Barcelona, 
Spain. eduard.molins@astrazeneca.com.
(6)Former employee of Almirall S.A., Barcelona, Spain. aleselbaum1@gmail.com.
(7)R&D Centre, AstraZeneca PLC (former employee of Almirall S.A.), Barcelona, 
Spain. esthergarciagil@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: The combination of aclidinium bromide, a long-acting 
anticholinergic, and formoterol fumarate, a long-acting beta2-agonist (400/12 μg 
twice daily) achieves improvements in lung function greater than either 
monotherapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and 
is approved in the European Union as a maintenance treatment. The effect of this 
combination on symptoms of COPD and exacerbations is less well established. We 
examined these outcomes in a pre-specified analysis of pooled data from two 
24-week, double-blind, parallel-group, active- and placebo-controlled, 
multicentre, randomised Phase III studies (ACLIFORM and AUGMENT).
METHODS: Patients ≥40 years with moderate to severe COPD (post-bronchodilator 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s [FEV1]/forced vital capacity <70 % and FEV1 ≥30 
% but <80 % predicted normal) were randomised (ACLIFORM: 2:2:2:2:1; AUGMENT: 
1:1:1:1:1) to twice-daily aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg or 400/6 μg, 
aclidinium 400 μg, formoterol 12 μg or placebo via Genuair™/Pressair®. Dyspnoea 
(Transition Dyspnoea Index; TDI), daily symptoms (EXAcerbations of Chronic 
pulmonary disease Tool [EXACT]-Respiratory Symptoms [E-RS] questionnaire), 
night-time and early-morning symptoms, exacerbations (Healthcare Resource 
Utilisation [HCRU] and EXACT definitions) and relief-medication use were 
assessed.
RESULTS: The pooled intent-to-treat population included 3394 patients. 
Aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg significantly improved TDI focal score versus 
placebo and both monotherapies at Week 24 (all p < 0.05). Over 24 weeks, 
significant improvements in E-RS total score, overall night-time and 
early-morning symptom severity and limitation of early-morning activities were 
observed with aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg versus placebo and both 
monotherapies (all p < 0.05). The rate of moderate or severe HCRU exacerbations 
was significantly reduced with aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg compared with 
placebo (p < 0.05) but not monotherapies; the rate of EXACT-defined 
exacerbations was significantly reduced with aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg 
versus placebo (p < 0.01) and aclidinium (p < 0.05). Time to first HCRU or EXACT 
exacerbation was longer with aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg compared with 
placebo (all p < 0.05) but not the monotherapies. Relief-medication use was 
reduced with aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg versus placebo and aclidinium 
(p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg significantly improves 24-hour 
symptom control compared with placebo, aclidinium and formoterol in patients 
with moderate to severe COPD. Furthermore, aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg 
reduces the frequency of exacerbations compared with placebo.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01462942 and NCT01437397 (ClinicalTrials.gov).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-015-0250-2
PMCID: PMC4531806
PMID: 26233481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Mar 26;10:677-87. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S76520. eCollection 2015.

Clinical potential of aclidinium bromide in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Jones PW(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Infection and Immunity, Faculty of Respiratory Medicine, St 
George's, University of London, London, UK.

Three long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) are now available in Europe, 
providing clinicians and patients with a choice of interventions, which is 
important in COPD, which is clinically a heterogeneous disease. The first LAMA, 
tiotropium, has been widely used over the last decade as a once-daily 
maintenance therapy in stable COPD to improve patients' health-related quality 
of life and to reduce the risk of exacerbations. Administered via the 
HandiHaler(®) device, it is safe and well tolerated. Another new once-daily 
LAMA, glycopyrronium, has also been shown to improve health status and reduce 
exacerbations, and is well tolerated. The subject of this review is a third 
LAMA, aclidinium bromide, which was approved as a twice-daily maintenance 
bronchodilator treatment. In the pivotal Phase III clinical trials, patients 
receiving aclidinium achieved significantly greater improvements in lung 
function, reductions in breathlessness, and improvements in health status 
compared with placebo, for up to 24 weeks. In continuation studies, these 
improvements were sustained for up to 52 weeks. Pooled data showed exacerbation 
frequency was significantly reduced with aclidinium versus placebo. Preclinical 
and pharmacological studies demonstrating low systemic bioavailability and a low 
propensity to induce cardiac arrhythmias were translated into a favorable 
tolerability profile in the clinical trial program - the adverse event profile 
of aclidinium was similar to placebo, with a low incidence of anticholinergic 
and cardiac adverse events. While additional studies are needed to evaluate its 
full clinical potential, aclidinium is an important part of this recent 
expansion of LAMA therapeutic options, providing clinicians and patients with an 
effective and well-tolerated COPD treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S76520
PMCID: PMC4381904
PMID: 25848244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Drug Saf. 2016 Jun;39(6):501-8. doi: 10.1007/s40264-016-0402-4.

Safety Considerations with Dual Bronchodilator Therapy in COPD: An Update.

Matera MG(1), Rogliani P(2), Calzetta L(2), Cazzola M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. 
mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.

Combining a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) with a long-acting anti-muscarinic 
agent (LAMA) provides synergistic benefit on airway smooth muscle relaxation, 
which may have major implications for the use of LABA/LAMA combinations in the 
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There are four 
different approved LAMA/LABA fixed-dose combinations 
(FDCs)-glycopyrronium/indacaterol, umeclidinium/vilanterol, 
tiotropium/olodaterol, and aclidinium/formoterol-and another, 
glycopyrronium/formoterol, that is still under clinical development. Many 
pivotal trials have shown that all of these FDCs are more effective than 
monotherapies in inducing bronchodilation and do not amplify the possible 
adverse events (AEs) that are characteristic of LAMAs and LABAs when used as 
monotherapy. Unfortunately, these clinical trials have included a very small and 
highly selected fraction of the COPD patient population. Therefore, it is 
questionable whether such data can be extrapolated to a larger, 'real-life' 
population of patients with COPD, especially given that COPD patients with 
co-morbidities are often excluded from clinical trials, COPD is a major risk 
factor for most cardiovascular diseases, and both LAMAs and LABAs have a high 
potential to impact cardiac activities. All clinical trials have been conducted 
under widely varying conditions and, consequently, AE rates of a drug observed 
in a clinical trial cannot be directly compared with rates in the clinical 
trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice. 
Head-to-head studies comparing the different LAMA/LABA FDCs that will include 
the true patients that we meet in our everyday practice are absolutely essential 
if we wish to make a therapeutic choice that is not purely empirical.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-016-0402-4
PMID: 26924197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2016 Feb;13(1):30-6. doi: 10.1007/s11897-016-0278-8.

Challenges in the Management of Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease and Heart Failure With Reduced Ejection Fraction.

Jaiswal A(1), Chichra A(2), Nguyen VQ(1), Gadiraju TV(1), Le Jemtel TH(3).

Author information:
(1)Tulane School of Medicine, Tulane University Heart and Vascular Institute, 
1430 Tulane Avenue, SL-48, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and critical care medicine, Tulane School of Medicine, 
1430 Tulane Avenue, SL-48, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
(3)Tulane School of Medicine, Tulane University Heart and Vascular Institute, 
1430 Tulane Avenue, SL-48, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. lejemtel@tulane.edu.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and heart failure with reduced 
ejection fraction (HFrEF) commonly coexist in clinical practice. The prevalence 
of COPD among HFrEF patients ranges from 20 to 32 %. On the other hand; HFrEF is 
prevalent in more than 20 % of COPD patients. With an aging population, the 
number of patients with coexisting COPD and HFrEF is on rise. Coexisting COPD 
and HFrEF presents a unique diagnostic and therapeutic clinical conundrum. 
Common symptoms shared by both conditions mask the early referral and detection 
of the other. Beta blockers (BB), angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and 
aldosterone antagonists have been shown to reduce hospitalizations, morbidity, 
and mortality in HFrEF while long-acting inhaled bronchodilators 
(beta-2-agonists and anticholinergics) and corticosteroids have been endorsed 
for COPD treatment. The opposing pharmacotherapy of BBs and beta-2-agonists 
highlight the conflict in prescribing BBs in COPD and beta-2-agonists in HFrEF. 
This has resulted in underutilization of evidence-based therapy for HFrEF in 
COPD patients owing to fear of adverse effects. This review aims to provide an 
update and current perspective on diagnostic and therapeutic management of 
patients with coexisting COPD and HFrEF.

DOI: 10.1007/s11897-016-0278-8
PMID: 26780914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2017 Jun;26(6):761-766. doi: 
10.1080/13543784.2017.1319472. Epub 2017 Apr 21.

Umeclidinium for the treatment of uncontrolled asthma.

Ferrando M(1), Bagnasco D(1), Braido F(1), Baiardini I(1), Passalacqua G(1), 
Puggioni F(2), Varricchi G(3), Canonica GW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Allergy and Respiratory Diseases, DIMI Department of Internal Medicine , 
University of Genoa, IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST , Genoa , Italy.
(2)b Personalized Medicine Clinic Asthma and Allergy, Humanitas Clinical and 
Research Center, Department of Biomedical Science , Humanitas University , 
Rozzano (Milan) , Italy.
(3)c Department of Translational Medical Sciences and Center for Basic and 
Clinical Immunology Research (CISI) , University of Naples Federico II , Naples 
, Italy.

Smooth muscle cell contraction in the airways is the principal therapeutic 
target in asthmatic subjects and its insufficient treatment is often a cause of 
uncontrolled disease. For this reason, research has focused on targeting smooth 
muscle activity with anticholinergic agents, including umeclidinium. Areas 
covered: This review highlights the potential application of umeclidinium, a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist, as a novel therapeutic approach for patients 
with severe uncontrolled asthma, despite maximal therapy. Expert opinion: 
Umeclidinium, similarly to tiotropium, which has been recently included in 
guidelines, may act by contrasting cholinergic activation in airways, preventing 
or at least reducing smooth muscle cells contraction and the consequent 
bronchoconstriction. This is similar to what occurs in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, for which umeclidinium has been regularly approved. However, 
available data is not sufficient and further studies are needed before 
regulatory approval can be sought, since only phase II clinical trials have been 
conducted at present. Both quality of life and objectifiable clinical data and 
parameters must be assessed, including lung function improvements, reduction of 
exacerbations and reduction of as required medications.

DOI: 10.1080/13543784.2017.1319472
PMID: 28406326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 Jun;16(6):707-714. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201809-615OC.

Sex Differences in Veterans Admitted to the Hospital for Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease Exacerbation.

Bade BC(1)(2), DeRycke EC(3)(4), Ramsey C(4), Skanderson M(4), Crothers K(5), 
Haskell S(4)(6), Bean-Mayberry B(7)(8), Brandt C(3)(9), Bastian LA(4)(6), Akgün 
KM(1)(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine.
(2)2 Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine and.
(3)3 VA Connecticut Healthcare System.
(4)4 Pain Research, Informatics, Multi-morbidities, and Education Center, 
Department of Veterans Affairs, and.
(5)5 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington.
(6)6 Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut.
(7)7 Veterans Administration Center for Study of Healthcare Innovation, 
Implementation and Policy, Veterans Administration Greater Los Angeles 
Healthcare System, Los Angeles, California; and.
(8)8 Division of General Internal Medicine, UCLA David Geffen School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles, California.
(9)9 Veterans Aging Cohort Study Coordinating Center, Veterans Administration 
Connecticut Health Care System, West Haven, Connecticut.

Rationale: As chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) prevalence in women 
has outpaced that in men, COPD-related hospitalization and mortality are now 
higher in women. Presentation, evaluation, and treatment of COPD differ between 
women and men. Despite higher smoking rates in Veterans, little work has 
characterized differences in Veterans with COPD by sex. Objectives: To determine 
risk factors for 30-day readmission among Veterans hospitalized for COPD 
exacerbations and how they differed by sex. Methods: We performed a 
retrospective observational analysis of Veterans receiving primary care in 
Veterans Health Affairs facilities. We included Veterans Administration-based 
hospitalizations for Veterans with a COPD exacerbation (identified by 
International Classification of Disease, Ninth Revision codes) who survived to 
discharge between fiscal years 2012 and 2015. Primary outcome was 30-day 
readmission. Predictors ascertained before hospitalization included smoking 
status (current, former, never), pulmonary function testing, pulmonary 
medication prescriptions, and medical and psychiatric comorbidities (identified 
by International Classification of Disease, ninth revision codes). We created 
combined and sex-stratified multivariate logistic regression models to identify 
associations with 30-day readmission. Results: Our sample included 48,888 
Veterans (4% women). Compared with men, women Veterans were younger, more likely 
to be nonwhite, and differed in smoking status. Women were more likely to have 
asthma, drug use, and several psychiatric comorbidities. Before hospitalization, 
women were less likely to have pulmonary function testing (76% vs. 78%; 
P = 0.01) or be treated with antimuscarinic (43% vs. 48%) or combined 
long-acting bronchodilator/inhaled corticosteroid (61% vs. 64%) inhalers. Women 
were more likely to receive nicotine-replacement therapy (all P < 0.01). Women 
had shorter length of stay (median days, 2 vs. 3; P = 0.04) and lower 30-day 
readmission rate (20% vs. 22%; P = 0.01). In adjusted models including both 
sexes, age, antimuscarinic use, comorbidities, and diagnosis of drug or alcohol 
use were associated with readmission; there was no association with sex and 
readmission risk. In models stratified by sex, associations were similar between 
women and men. Conclusions: This study suggests differences between women and 
men hospitalized for COPD regarding presentation, evaluation, and management. 
Readmission is strongly influenced by comorbidities, suggesting individualized 
and comprehensive case management may reduce readmission risk for women and men 
with COPD.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201809-615OC
PMCID: PMC6543475
PMID: 30822098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Chin Med Assoc. 2019 Jun;82(6):488-494. doi: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000000114.

long acting muscarinic antagonist versus long-acting beta agonist/corticosteroid 
for moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients: 
Exacerbation risk assessment.

Yang SN(1)(2), Ko HK(3)(4), Hsiao YH(3)(4), Su KC(3)(4), Chang YL(1)(5), Huang 
HY(6)(7), Perng DW(3)(4), Chung MI(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 
ROC.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.
(3)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan, ROC.
(4)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(5)Department and Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(6)College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(7)Biostatistics Task Force, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 
ROC.

BACKGROUND: Whether the beneficial effects of long acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMA) are better than those of long-acting beta agonist/corticosteroids 
(LABA/ICS) in preventing exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) remains unclear. This study aimed to assess the risk of exacerbations in 
moderate to severe COPD patients receiving LAMA versus LABA/ICS.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of patients diagnosed 
with COPD (2008-2010). The inclusion criteria were age ≥ 40 years, forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 30% to 80% of predicted value and at least 
three prescriptions for COPD medication, including LAMA or LABA/ICS.
RESULTS: Of the 557 COPD patients screened, 90 patients were enrolled in the 
analysis. The demographic characteristics of patients receiving LABA/ICS or LAMA 
were similar. The all exacerbation rates was significantly higher in patients 
with global initiative for chronic obstructive lung disease stage II COPD 
treated with LABA/ICS than in those treated with LAMA (p = 0.001), regardless of 
previous exacerbation history. Patients with previous exacerbation history 
showed an independent increase in the risk of moderate or severe exacerbation 
compared with those without exacerbation history (hazard ratio 3.86, 95% CI 
1.75-8.53, p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: In comparison with LABA/ICS, LAMA is beneficial in reducing 
exacerbation risk for moderate COPD. Previous exacerbation history independently 
predicts the future risk of exacerbation regardless of treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000000114
PMID: 31180947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Herz. 2019 Sep;44(6):517-521. doi: 10.1007/s00059-019-4834-3.

Pulmonary and cardiac drugs: clinically relevant interactions.

Olschewski H(1), Canepa M(2), Kovacs G(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University 
of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 15, 8036, Graz, Austria. 
horst.olschewski@medunigraz.at.
(2)Cardiovascular Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova, 
Genova, Italy.
(3)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University 
of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 15, 8036, Graz, Austria.

Chronic heart and lung diseases are very common in the elderly population. The 
combination of chronic heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) is also common and, according to current guidelines, these patients 
should be treated for both diseases. In patients with heart failure, 
beta-blockers are very important drugs because their use is associated with 
significantly improved morbidity and mortality. These beneficial effects were 
documented in patients with and without COPD, although theoretically there is a 
risk for bronchoconstriction, particularly with non-beta1 selective blockers. In 
COPD patients, long-acting sympathomimetics (LABA) improve lung function, 
dyspnea, and quality of life and their combination with a beta-blocker makes 
sense from a pharmacological and a clinical point of view, because any potential 
arrhythmogenic effects of the LABA will be ameliorated by the beta-blocker. 
Inhaled tiotropium, a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), has been 
extensively investigated and no safety concerns were reported in terms of 
cardiac adverse effects. The same applies for the other approved LAMA 
preparations and LAMA-LABA combinations. Severe COPD causes air-trapping with 
increasing pressures in the thorax, leading to limitations in blood return into 
the thorax from the periphery of the body. This causes a decrease in stroke 
volume and cardiac index and is associated with dyspnea. All these adverse 
effects can be ameliorated by potent anti-obstructive therapy as recently shown 
by means of a LABA-LAMA combination.

Chronische Herz- und Lungenerkrankungen sind in der älteren Bevölkerung sehr 
verbreitet. Die Kombination von chronischer Herzinsuffizienz und chronischer 
obstruktiver Lungenerkrankung (COPD) ist ebenfalls häufig, und diese Patienten 
sollten, gemäß aktuellen Leitlinien, hinsichtlich beider Erkrankungen behandelt 
werden. Bei Patienten mit Herzinsuffizienz spielen Betablocker eine sehr 
wichtige Rolle, weil ihre Anwendung mit einer signifikant verbesserten 
Morbidität und Mortalität einhergeht. Diese günstigen Auswirkungen wurden sowohl 
bei Patienten mit als auch bei Patienten ohne COPD dokumentiert, obwohl 
theoretisch das Risiko einer Bronchokonstriktion besteht, insbesondere bei 
nicht-beta1-selektiven Blockern. Bei COPD-Patienten führen langwirksame 
Sympathomimetika (LABA) zu einer Verbesserung in Bezug auf Lungenfunktion, 
Dyspnoe und Lebensqualität, und ihre Kombination mit einem Betablocker ist aus 
pharmakologischer und klinischer Sicht sinnvoll, da potenzielle arrhythmogene 
Wirkungen der LABA günstig durch den Betablocker beeinflusst werden. 
Inhalierbares Tiotropium, ein langwirksamer Muskarinantagonist (LAMA), wurde 
umfassend untersucht, es bestätigten sich jedoch keine Sicherheitsbedenken 
hinsichtlich kardialer Nebenwirkungen. Gleiches gilt für die anderen 
zugelassenen LAMA-Präparate und LAMA-LABA-Kombinationen. Eine schwergradige COPD 
verursacht eine Lungenüberblähung mit ansteigendem Druck im Thorax, was zur 
Beeinträchtigung des Blutrückflusses aus der Peripherie des Körpers in den 
Thorax führt. Dies verursacht eine Abnahme des Schlagvolumens und des Herzindex 
und geht mit Dyspnoe einher. All diese Nebenwirkungen können durch eine potente 
antiobstruktive Therapie günstig beeinflusst werden, wie kürzlich mittels einer 
LABA-LAMA-Kombination nachgewiesen wurde.

DOI: 10.1007/s00059-019-4834-3
PMCID: PMC6726702
PMID: 31297545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H. Olschewski, M. Canepa, and G. Kovacs declare 
that they have no competing interests.


241. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Dec 18;11:1-12. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S91407. 
eCollection 2016.

Efficacy and safety of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol or tiotropium in subjects 
with COPD at cardiovascular risk.

Covelli H(1), Pek B(2), Schenkenberger I(3), Scott-Wilson C(4), Emmett A(5), 
Crim C(4).

Author information:
(1)Kootenai Health, Coeur d'Alene, ID, USA.
(2)Clinique de Pneumologie et de Sommeil de Lanaudière, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Klinische Forschung, Berlin, Germany.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline Inc., Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC, USA.
(5)PAREXEL International, Durham, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI) is a novel, once-daily, 
inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist combination approved for the 
treatment of COPD and asthma. We compared the safety and efficacy of FF/VI and 
tiotropium (TIO) in subjects with moderate-to-severe COPD with greater risk for 
comorbid cardiovascular disease (CVD).
METHODS: This randomized, blinded, double-dummy, parallel-group study compared a 
once-daily morning dose of FF/VI 100/25 mcg delivered via ELLIPTA™ with TIO 18 
mcg via HandiHaler(®) for 12 weeks in subjects with diagnosed COPD, forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 30%-70% predicted, and CVD or CVD risk. The 
primary endpoint was change from baseline in 24-hour weighted mean FEV1 on Day 
84. Other efficacy endpoints included time to onset of bronchodilation, trough 
FEV1, other spirometry measures, rescue medication use, symptoms, quality of 
life (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire-COPD [SGRQ-C]), and health status 
(COPD Assessment Tests [CAT]) measures. Safety endpoints included cardiovascular 
monitoring, cortisol excretion, COPD exacerbations, and adverse events, 
including prespecified drug effects.
RESULTS: Both FF/VI and TIO improved the 24-hour weighted mean FEV1 from 
baseline after 12 weeks with no significant difference between treatments. Other 
endpoints favored FF/VI for time to onset of bronchodilation, rescue medication 
use, dyspnea, SGRQ-C and CAT scores, or favored TIO for change from baseline in 
forced vital capacity and inspiratory capacity. Pneumonia occurred more 
frequently in the FF/VI group, and two TIO-treated subjects died following 
cardiovascular events. Other safety measures were similar between groups, and 
cardiovascular monitoring did not reveal increased CVD risk.
CONCLUSION: Both FF/VI and TIO were efficacious in improving lung function in 
subjects with COPD and comorbid CVD or CVD risk factors, with minor differences 
in efficacy and safety profiles.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S91407
PMCID: PMC4694692
PMID: 26730183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Nov;56(11):1423-1432. doi: 10.1002/jcph.750.

Role of Tiotropium in Reducing Exacerbations of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease When Combined With Long-Acting β(2) -Agonists and Inhaled 
Corticosteroids: The OUTPUL Study.

Ferroni E(1), Belleudi V(1), Cascini S(1), Di Martino M(1), Kirchmayer U(1), 
Pistelli R(2), Patorno E(3), Formoso G(4), Fusco D(1), Perucci CA(5), Davoli 
M(1), Agabiti N(6); OUTPUL Study Group(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Lazio Regional Health Service, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Respiratory Physiology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy.
(3)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Department of 
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Emilia-Romagna Regional Health and Social Care Agency, Bologna, Italy.
(5)National Outcome Evaluation Program, National Agency for Regional Health 
Services, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Lazio Regional Health Service, Rome, Italy. 
n.agabiti@deplazio.it.

Combined inhaled therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is 
commonly used, but its benefits remain controversial. We assessed the effect of 
tiotropium in reducing COPD exacerbations when combined with long-acting beta 
agonists (LABA) and/or inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). This new-user cohort study 
is based on administrative data from 3 Italian regions. We identified adults 
hospitalized for COPD from 2006 to 2009 who were newly prescribed a fixed 
LABA/ICS combination (double therapy). We classified patients according to 
whether tiotropium was also prescribed (triple therapy), using both 
intention-to-treat and as-treated approaches, and followed them for 1 year. COPD 
exacerbations were measured as outcomes. Multivariate and propensity 
score-adjusted hazard ratios (HRs, 95%CI) were calculated with Cox regression 
models. We identified 5717 new users of LABA/ICS of which 31.9% initiated triple 
therapy. In the intention-to-treat analysis, the multivariate adjusted HR for 
moderate, severe, and any exacerbations were 1.02 (95%CI 0.89-1.16), 0.92 (95%CI 
0.76-1.12), and 1.08 (95%CI 0.91-1.28), respectively. The propensity score 
adjustment produced similar results. In the subcohort of patients with previous 
exacerbations, triple therapy was significantly associated with reduced risk of 
moderate exacerbations, compared to double therapy (HR 0.68, 95%CI 0.48-0.98 in 
intention-to-treat approach). In conclusion, the addition of tiotropium to 
LABA/ICS did not reduce COPD exacerbations compared to LABA/ICS alone. A 
protective role for moderate exacerbations was found in patients at risk of 
frequent exacerbations. Given the impact of exacerbations on health status and 
prognosis, it is crucial to target COPD patients for optimal treatment.

© 2016, The Authors. The Journal of Clinical Pharmacology Published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American College of Clinical Pharmacology.

DOI: 10.1002/jcph.750
PMCID: PMC5111769
PMID: 27095425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Respirology. 2018 Dec;23(12):1152-1159. doi: 10.1111/resp.13374. Epub 2018 Aug 
3.

Efficacy and safety of the direct switch to indacaterol/glycopyrronium from 
salmeterol/fluticasone in non-frequently exacerbating COPD patients: The FLASH 
randomized controlled trial.

Frith PA(1), Ashmawi S(2), Krishnamurthy S(3), Gurgun A(4), Hristoskova S(5), 
Pilipovic V(5), Hamann AM(6), Backer A(5), Olsson P(7), Kostikas K(5), Diaz 
DV(8); FLASH Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Southern Adelaide Local Health Network, 
Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(2)Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Sri Bala Medical Centre and Hospital, Coimbatore, India.
(4)Ege University Medical Faculty, İzmir, Turkey.
(5)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)DATAMAP GmbH, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Novartis Sverige AB, Sweden.
(8)Lung Center of the Philippines, Quezon City, Philippines.

Comment in
    Respirology. 2018 Dec;23(12):1088-1089.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Combination long-acting beta -agonist/long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LABA/LAMA) has demonstrated superior clinical outcomes 
over LABA/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) patients; however, data from blinded randomized controlled trials on 
direct switching from LABA/ICS to LABA/LAMA are lacking. FLASH (Assessment of 
switching salmeterol/Fluticasone to indacateroL/glycopyrronium in A Symptomatic 
COPD patient coHort) investigated if direct switch, without a washout period, 
from salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC) to indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) in 
COPD patients improves lung function and is well tolerated.
METHODS: In this 12-week, multicentre, double-blind study, patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD and up to one exacerbation in previous year, receiving 
SFC for ≥3 months, were randomized to continue SFC 50/500 μg twice daily (bd) or 
switch to IND/GLY 110/50 μg once daily (od). Primary endpoint was pre-dose 
trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1 ) at Week 12.
RESULTS: In total, 502 patients were randomized (1:1) to IND/GLY or SFC. 
Patients switched to IND/GLY demonstrated superior lung function (pre-dose 
trough FEV1 ) versus SFC at Week 12 (treatment difference (Δ) = 45 mL; 
P = 0.028). IND/GLY provided significant improvements in pre-dose trough forced 
vital capacity (FVC; Δ = 102 mL; P = 0.002) and numerical improvements in 
transition dyspnoea index (TDI; Δ = 0.46; P = 0.063). Rescue medication use and 
COPD assessment test (CAT) scores were comparable between groups. Both 
treatments had similar safety profiles.
CONCLUSION: FLASH demonstrated that a direct switch to IND/GLY from SFC improved 
pre-dose FEV1 and FVC in COPD patients with up to one exacerbation in the 
previous year. No new safety signals were identified.

© 2018 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13374
PMID: 30074294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Apr 12;12:1145-1152. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S131016. eCollection 2017.

Characteristics of COPD patients initiating treatment with aclidinium or 
tiotropium in primary care in Catalonia: a population-based study.

Monteagudo M(1)(2), Roset M(3), Rodriguez-Blanco T(1)(2), Muñoz L(4), 
Miravitlles M(5).

Author information:
(1)Primary Care University Research Institute Jordi Gol (IDIAP Jordi Gol), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra (Cerdanyola del Vallès), Spain.
(3)IMS Health, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Agència de Qualitat i Avaluació Sanitàries de Catalunya (AQuAS), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To describe and compare demographic and clinical profile of patients 
newly initiated on aclidinium (ACL) or tiotropium (TIO) and identify factors 
associated with newly initiated ACL in real-life clinical practice during 2013 
in Catalonia.
DESIGN: We performed a population-based, retrospective, observational study with 
data obtained from the Information System for Research Development in Primary 
Care, a population database that contains information of 5.8 million inhabitants 
(more than 80% of the Catalan population). Patients over 40 years old, with a 
recorded diagnosis of COPD and newly initiated treatment with either ACL or TIO 
during the study period (January to December 2013), were selected. A descriptive 
analysis of demographic and clinical characteristics was performed, and 
treatment adherence was also assessed for both cohorts.
RESULTS: A total of 8,863 individuals were identified, 4,293 initiated with ACL 
and 4,570 with TIO. They had a mean age of 69.4 years (standard deviation: 
11.3), a median COPD duration of 3 years (interquartile range: 0-8), and 71% 
were males. Patients treated with ACL were older, with more respiratory 
comorbidities, a longer time since COPD diagnosis, worse forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (% predicted), and with a higher rate of exacerbations during 
the previous year compared with TIO. It was found that 41.3% of patients with 
ACL and 62.3% of patients with TIO had no previous COPD treatment. Inhaled 
corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist were the most frequent concomitant 
medications (32.9% and 32.6%, respectively). Approximately 75% of patients were 
persistent with ACL or TIO at 3 months from the beginning of treatment, and more 
than 50% of patients remained persistent at 9 months.
CONCLUSION: Patients initiated with ACL had more severe COPD and were taking 
more concomitant respiratory medications than patients initiated with TIO. ACL 
was more frequently initiated as part of triple therapy, while TIO was more 
frequently initiated as monotherapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S131016
PMCID: PMC5396831
PMID: 28442901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Marc Miravitlles has received speaker 
fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini, 
Teva, Grifols, and Novartis, and consulting fees from Bayer Schering, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Gebro Pharma, CLS Behring, Cipla, MediImmune, Mereo 
Biopharma, Teva, Novartis, and Grifols. The authors report no other conflicts of 
interest in this work.


245. Respir Res. 2018 Dec 13;19(1):251. doi: 10.1186/s12931-018-0944-3.

Spirometric changes during exacerbations of COPD: a post hoc analysis of the 
WISDOM trial.

Watz H(1), Tetzlaff K(2)(3), Magnussen H(4), Mueller A(5), Rodriguez-Roisin 
R(6), Wouters EFM(7), Vogelmeier C(8), Calverley PMA(9).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lungen Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research 
Center North (ARCN), German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Wöhrendamm 80, 
22927, Grosshansdorf, Germany. H.Watz@pulmoresearch.de.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(3)Department of Sports Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lungen Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research 
Center North (ARCN), German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Wöhrendamm 80, 
22927, Grosshansdorf, Germany.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
(6)Hospital Clínic IDIBAPS-CIBERES, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Center, 
Maastricht, Netherlands.
(8)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany.
(9)Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, Clinical Science Centre, University 
Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, UK.

BACKGROUND: Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are 
associated with loss of lung function and poor outcomes for patients. However, 
there are limited data on the time course of changes in forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s (FEV1) preceding the first reported symptom and after the start of an 
exacerbation.
METHODS: WISDOM was a multinational, randomized, double-blind, 
active-controlled, 52-week study in patients with severe-to-very severe COPD. 
Patients received triple therapy (long acting muscarinic antagonist and 
long-acting beta-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid [ICS]) for 6 weeks, and were 
randomized to continue triple therapy or stepwise withdrawal of the ICS (dual 
bronchodilator group). After suitable training, patients performed daily 
spirometry at home using a portable, battery-operated spirometer. In the present 
post hoc analysis, patients who continued to perform daily home spirometry and 
completed at least one measurement per week for a 56-day period before and after 
the start of a moderate or severe exacerbation were included. Missing values 
were imputed by linear interpolation (intermittent), backfilling (beginning) or 
carry forward (end). Exacerbation onset was the first day of a reported symptom 
of exacerbation.
RESULTS: Eight hundred and eighty-eight patients in the WISDOM study had a 
moderate/severe exacerbation after the complete ICS withdrawal visit; 360 of 
them contributed at least one FEV1 measure per week for the 8 weeks before and 
after the event and are included in this analysis. Mean daily FEV1 began to 
decline from approximately 2 weeks before the onset of symptoms of an 
exacerbation, dropping from 0.907 L (mean Days - 56 to - 36 before the 
exacerbation) to 0.860 L on the first day of the exacerbation. After the 
exacerbation, mean FEV1 improved but did not return to pre-exacerbation levels 
(mean Days 36-56 after the exacerbation, 0.875 L). The pattern of FEV1 changes 
around exacerbations was similar in the triple therapy and dual bronchodilator 
groups, and a similar pattern was seen in moderate and severe exacerbations when 
analysed separately.
CONCLUSIONS: Mean lung function starts to decline prior to the first reported 
symptoms of an exacerbation, and does not recover to pre-exacerbation levels 
8 weeks after the event.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: WISDOM (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00975195 ).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-018-0944-3
PMCID: PMC6293570
PMID: 30545350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, the 
International Conference on Harmonisation’s Harmonised Tripartite Guideline for 
Good Clinical Practice and local regulations. The protocol was approved by the 
ethics research board of the respective institutions. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: 
Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: HW reports that his institute was 
reimbursed by Boehringer Ingelheim for the conduct of the study, and he received 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and Roche outside the submitted work. HM reports 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and ndd Medical 
Technologies during the conduct of the study. RR-R reports personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim and Pearl Therapeutics outside the submitted 
work. EFMW reports personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Nycomed, 
AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and Chiesi. CV reports grants and 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Grifols, Mundipharma, Novartis and Takeda, personal fees from Almirall, Cipla, 
Berlin-Chemie/Menarini, CSL Behring and Teva, and grants from the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research’ (BMBF) Competence Network Asthma and COPD 
(ASCONET), Bayer Schering Pharma AG, MSD and Pfizer outside the submitted work. 
PMAC reports grants and personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline and Takeda, personal 
fees from AstraZeneca and Novartis, and personal fees and non-financial support 
from Boehringer Ingelheim outside the submitted work. KT and AM are employees of 
Boehringer Ingelheim. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


246. Chest. 2015 Aug;148(2):397-407. doi: 10.1378/chest.15-0084.

A Systematic Review of the Efficacy and Safety of a Fixed-Dose Combination of 
Umeclidinium and Vilanterol for the Treatment of COPD.

Rodrigo GJ(1), Neffen H(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Emergencia, Hospital Central de las Fuerzas Armadas, 
Montevideo, Uruguay. Electronic address: gustavo.javier.rodrigo@gmail.com.
(2)Unidad de Medicina Respiratoria, Hospital de Niños "O. Santa Fe, Argentina.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2015 Dec 15;163(12):JC10.
    Praxis (Bern 1994). 2015 Oct 28;104(22):1221.

BACKGROUND: COPD guidelines recommend the combined use of inhaled long-acting 
beta-agonists (LABAs) and long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) if symptoms 
are not improved by a single agent. This systematic review tested the hypothesis 
that the bronchodilator effect of the LABA/LAMA combination, umeclidinium 
(UMEC)/vilanterol (VIL), would translate into better outcomes without incurring 
increased adverse events (AEs).
METHODS: This was a systematic review of randomized, placebo-controlled or 
crossover trials (> 4 weeks) involving UMEC/VIL compared with its 
monocomponents, tiotropium, or fluticasone/salmeterol. Primary outcomes were 
trough FEV1, serious adverse events (SAEs), and serious cardiovascular events 
(SCVEs).
RESULTS: Eleven trials from 10 studies (9,609 patients) showed that UMEV/VIL 
provided superior improvements in lung function compared with UMEC, VIL, 
tiotropium, and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (mean trough FEV1, 60, 110, 
90, and 90 mL, respectively; P < .0001). Also, UMEC/VIL had a greater likelihood 
of demonstrating a minimal clinically important difference on the Transition 
Dyspnea Index compared with UMEC and VIL (number needed to treat for benefit 
[NNTB] = 14 and 10, respectively). UMEC/VIL therapy significantly reduced the 
risk of COPD exacerbations compared with UMEC and VIL (NNTB = 42 and 41, 
respectively). On the contrary, we noted no significant differences between 
UMEC/VIL and tiotropium with respect to dyspnea, health status, or risk of COPD 
exacerbation. Regarding safety issues, the incidence of AEs, SAEs, SCVEs, and 
mortality on treatment was similar across treatments, suggesting reduced safety 
concerns with the use of the UMEC/VIL combination.
CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily inhaled UMEC/VIL showed superior efficacy compared with 
its monocomponents, tiotropium, and fluticasone/combination in patients with 
moderate to severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.15-0084
PMID: 25798635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2018 Jun;13(6):563-577. doi: 
10.1080/17460441.2018.1455661. Epub 2018 Apr 4.

The discovery and development of aclidinium bromide for the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Malerba M(1), Radaeli A(2), Santini G(3)(4), Morjaria J(5), Mores N(3)(4), 
Mondino C(6), Macis G(7)(8), Montuschi P(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Translational Medicine-Respiratory Medicine , University of 
"Piemonte Orientale" , Vercelli , Italy.
(2)b Department of Internal Medicine , University of Brescia , Brescia , Italy.
(3)c Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine , Catholic University of 
the Sacred Heart , Rome , Italy.
(4)d Pharmacology Unit , Agostino Gemelli University Hospital Foundation , Rome 
, Italy.
(5)e Department of Respiratory Medicine , RBHT Foundation Trust, Harefield 
Hospital , Harefield , UK.
(6)f Department of Allergology , "Bellinzona e Valli" Hospital , Bellinzona , 
Switzerland.
(7)g Department of Radiological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine , Catholic 
University of the Sacred Heart , Rome , Italy.
(8)h Radiology Unit , Agostino Gemelli University Hospital Foundation , Rome , 
Italy.

Bronchodilators, including long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMAs), 
are a mainstay of the pharmacological treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). LAMAs act as bronchodilators principally by antagonizing airway 
smooth muscle cells M3 muscarinic receptors. Aclidinium bromide is a twice-daily 
LAMA which was developed to improve on the efficacy and/or safety of previous 
LAMAs. Area covered: Herein, the authors present the pharmacotherapeutic role of 
aclidinium in COPD and point out unmet need in this research area. The following 
aspects are covered: a) the discovery and medicinal chemistry of aclidinium 
bromide; b) an overview of the market; c) its mechanism of action; d) its 
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic profile derived from pre-clinical studies; e) 
the clinical studies which led to its licensing; f) the evidence from 
meta-analyses; g) the aclidinium/formoterol fixed dose combination for COPD and 
h) priorities in this area of research. Expert opinion: Aclidinium bromide has 
the pharmacological properties, safety and efficacy profile and inhaler 
characteristics which makes it a valuable therapeutic option for pharmacological 
management of patients with COPD. Due to its rapid biotransformation into 
inactive metabolites, aclidinium is potentially one of the safest LAMAs. Further 
head-to-head randomized clinical trials are required to define efficacy and 
safety of aclidinium when compared to once-daily LAMAs. The clinical relevance 
of airway anti-remodeling effects of aclidinium has to be defined.

DOI: 10.1080/17460441.2018.1455661
PMID: 29616842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Arch Bronconeumol. 2015 Apr;51(4):193-8. doi: 10.1016/j.arbres.2014.11.001. Epub 
2014 Dec 23.

"Correct use of inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease": a consensus document.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Alcázar Navarrete B(1), Casanova C(2), Miravitlles M(3), de Lucas P(4), Riesco 
JA(5), Rodríguez González-Moro JM(4); Working Group “Consensus document on the 
appropriate use of inhaled corticosteroids in COPD”.

Collaborators: Villar A, Sancho A, Huerta A, Cosío B, Esteban C, Ruiz F, Barba 
G, Quintano JA, Campos JL, Bañuelos JL, Cataluña JJ, de Torres JP, Rodríguez M, 
Rubio M, Sidro P, Ecenarro P, Marcos P, Mena P, Balbín R, de Molina R.

Author information:
(1)Neumología, Área integrada de gestión de Medicina, Hospital de Alta 
Resolución de Loja, APES Hospital de Poniente, Granada, España. Electronic 
address: balcazar@telefonica.net.
(2)Servicio de Neumología, Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario 
Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria, Tenerife, España.
(3)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, 
España.
(4)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, 
Madrid, España.
(5)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital San Pedro de Alcántara, Cáceres, España.

Comment in
    Arch Bronconeumol. 2016 Apr;52(4):229.

INTRODUCTION: Indications for inhaled corticosteroids (IC) in combination with 
long-acting bronchodilators (LABD) are well defined in clinical practice 
guidelines. However, there are some doubts about their efficacy and safety. The 
aim of this document is to establish an expert consensus to clarify these 
issues.
METHOD: A coordinator group was formed, which systematically reviewed the 
scientific evidence with the aim of identifying areas of uncertainty about the 
efficacy of ICs, the adverse effects associated with their use and criteria for 
withdrawal. Their proposals were submitted to a panel of experts and the Delphi 
technique was used to test the level of consensus.
RESULTS: Twenty-five experts participated in the panel, and consensus was 
reached on the use of IC in the mixed chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD)-asthma phenotype and in frequent exacerbators, and on not using IC in 
association with LABD for improving lung function in COPD. There was no general 
consensus on restricting the use of IC to prevent adverse effects. The panel did 
agree that IC withdrawal is feasible but should be undertaken gradually, and 
patients who have discontinued must be evaluated in the short term.
CONCLUSIONS: Consensus was reached regarding the indication of IC in mixed 
COPD-asthma and frequent exacerbator phenotypes. The potential for adverse 
effects must be taken into consideration, but there is no consensus on whether 
limiting use is justified. The withdrawal of ICs was uniformly agreed to be 
feasible.

Copyright © 2014 SEPAR. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arbres.2014.11.001
PMID: 25540900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2019 Jan;144(1):15-20. doi: 10.1055/a-0570-3595. Epub 2019 
Jan 2.

[The stepwise approach of COPD therapy].

[Article in German]

Watz H, Kirsten A, Greulich T.

The goal of pharmacologic therapy of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) is to reduce symptoms, improve exercise intolerance and 
health-related quality of life, and to reduce exacerbations. Inhaled long-acting 
beta-agonists (LABAs) and long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) are equally 
effective for the symptomatic management of COPD. However, LAMAs are more 
effective than LABAs in the reduction of exacerbations. In patients with 
symptomatic COPD pharmacologic therapy is usually escalated using the fixed 
combination of LAMAs and LABAs (dual bronchodilation), which is also superior to 
LAMA monotherapy in the prevention of exacerbations. Adding inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) to LABA and LAMA (triple therapy) for a prevention of 
exacerbations results in a further reduction of exacerbations, especially in 
those patients with higher blood eosinophil counts. Non-pharmacologic management 
of COPD patients includes smoking cessation programs, vaccination, pulmonary 
rehabilitation, and strategies to improve or maintain their physical activity.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0570-3595
PMID: 30602182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Henrik Watz: Honorare für Vorträge und Beratung 
sowie Reisekostenunterstützung von AstraZeneca, Bayer, BerlinChemie, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Menarini, Takeda, Roche.Anne Kirsten: 
Honorare für Vorträge und Beratung von AstraZeneca Boehringer Ingelheim.Timm 
Greulich: Honorare für Vorträge, Beratertätigkeiten oder Reiseunterstützung von 
AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, CSL-Behring, Grifols, 
GSK, Mundipharma, Novartis, StreamedUp.


250. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2018 Jun;40:95-103. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2018.03.011. Epub 
2018 Apr 4.

Pharmacological mechanisms leading to synergy in fixed-dose dual bronchodilator 
therapy.

Calzetta L(1), Matera MG(2), Cazzola M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome "Tor 
Vergata", Rome, Italy. Electronic address: luigino.calzetta@uniroma2.it.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, 
Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome "Tor 
Vergata", Rome, Italy.

Long-acting beta adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) in combination with long-acting 
muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) can elicit functional and clinical benefits in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). LABA/LAMA combinations 
synergistically relax human isolated airways at the level of the medium and 
small bronchi. LABAs and LAMAs both modulate the bronchial tone via different 
pathways localized at the level of presynaptic parasympathetic fibers and airway 
smooth muscle cells. The exact nature of the interactions between these pathways 
is not completely understood, but there is cross-talk at many levels in airway 
smooth muscle cells that is also regulated by the activity of calcium-activated 
potassium channels and protein tyrosine kinases. While the synergy between LABAs 
and LAMAs is a class effect, some of the currently available fixed-dose 
combinations (FDCs) do not induce synergistic interaction because the individual 
components are not appropriately balanced in the combination. Concerns remain on 
the cardiovascular safety profile of LABA/LAMA FDCs.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coph.2018.03.011
PMID: 29626716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Clin Drug Investig. 2018 Jul;38(7):611-620. doi: 10.1007/s40261-018-0646-0.

Cost-Effectiveness of Fixed-Dose Combinations Therapies for Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease Treatment.

Capel M(1), Mareque M(2), Álvarez CJ(3), Lindner L(4), Oyagüez I(5).

Author information:
(1)Astra Zeneca, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research Iberia (PORIB), Madrid, Spain. 
mmareque@porib.com.
(3)Servicio Neumología, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Astra Zeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research Iberia (PORIB), Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a 
progressive lung disorder associated with decline of respiratory function, 
affects 10.2% of Spanish adults (40-80 years of age). This study aimed to assess 
the cost-effectiveness of two fixed-dose combinations of long acting muscarinic 
antagonist and long-acting beta-agonist therapies for COPD, with Spanish National 
Health System perspective.
METHODS: A Markov model with five health states based on severity levels defined 
by GOLD 2010 criteria was used to simulate in monthly cycles the evolution along 
a 5-year period of a cohort of moderate-to-severe COPD patients, treated with 
aclidinium-formoterol (ACL/FF) 400/12 µg or tiotropium-olodaterol (TIO/OLO) 
5/5 µg fixed-dose combinations. Clinical data on lung-function improvement were 
obtained from a network meta-analysis and applied to mean baseline 
forced-expiratory-volume in 1 s (FEV1) for the first 24-weeks period. Natural 
history for lung-function decline (41 ml/year) was applied until the end of 
simulation. Risk of exacerbation and pneumonia occurrence were considered. 
Pharmaceutical costs were calculated with dosages according to indication and 
public ex-factory prices. The health state-specific disease management and event 
costs, and utilities were derived from the literature. Total costs (€ 2016) and 
benefits [life-year-gained (LYG) and quality-adjusted-life-year (QALY)] were 
discounted (3.0% yearly). Sensitivity analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Both therapies provided the same outcomes (4.073 LYG and 2.928 QALY) at 
5-year period. ACL/FF 400/12 µg provided marginally lower costs (€ - 332) 
compared to TIO/OLO 5/5 µg.
CONCLUSION: ACL/FF 400/12 µg was a cost-saving therapy in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD in Spain, and provided equivalent effects compared to 
TIO/OLO 5/5 µg.

DOI: 10.1007/s40261-018-0646-0
PMID: 29654555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Curr Pharm Des. 2015;21(13):1672-89. doi: 10.2174/1381612821666150130121229.

Treating COPD in Older and Oldest Old Patients.

Corsonello A, Scarlata S, Pedone C, Bustacchini S, Fusco S, Zito A, Incalzi 
RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Geriatric Pharmacoepidemiology, IRCCS-INRCA, Cosenza, Italy. 
andrea_corsonello@tin.it.

The treatment of older and oldest old patients with COPD poses several problems 
and should be tailored to specific outcomes, such as physical functioning. 
Indeed, impaired homeostatic mechanisms, deteriorated physiological systems, and 
limited functional reserve mainly contribute to this complex scenario. 
Therefore, we reviewed the main difficulties in managing therapy for these 
patients and possible remedies. Inhaled long acting betaagonists (LABA) and 
anticholinergics (LAMA) are the mainstay of therapy in stable COPD, but it 
should be considered that pharmacological response and safety profile may vary 
significantly in older patients with multimorbidity. Their association with 
inhaled corticosteroids is recommended only for patients with severe or very 
severe airflow limitation or with frequent exacerbations despite bronchodilator 
treatment. In hypoxemic patients, long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) may improve 
not only general comfort and exercise tolerance, but also cognitive functions 
and sleep. Nonpharmacological interventions, including education, physical 
exercise, nutritional support, pulmonary rehabilitation and telemonitoring can 
importantly contribute to improve outcomes. Older patients with COPD should be 
systematically evaluated for the presence of risk factors for non-adherence, and 
the inhaler device should be chosen very carefully. Comorbidities, such as 
cardiovascular diseases, chronic kidney disease, osteoporosis, obesity, 
cognitive, visual and auditory impairment, may significantly affect treatment 
choices and should be scrutinized. Palliative care is of paramount importance in 
end-stage COPD. Finally, treatment of COPD exacerbations has been also reviewed. 
Therapeutic decisions should be founded on a careful assessment of cognitive and 
functional status, comorbidity, polypharmacy, and agerelated changes in 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in order to minimize adverse drug events, 
drug-drug or drug-disease interactions, and non-adherence to treatment.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612821666150130121229
PMID: 25633118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. COPD. 2015;12(6):668-79. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1020148.

Socioeconomic Status, Sex, Age and Access to Medications for COPD in Ontario, 
Canada.

Gershon A(1)(2)(3)(4), Campitelli MA(1), Hwee J(1), Croxford R(1), To 
T(1)(3)(4), Stanbrook MB(1)(4), Upshur R(1)(2)(4), Stephenson A(1), Stukel 
TA(1).

Author information:
(1)a Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences , Toronto , Ontario , Canada.
(2)b Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre , Toronto , Ontario , Canada.
(3)c The Hospital for Sick Children , Toronto , Ontario , Canada.
(4)d University of Toronto , Toronto , Ontario , Canada.

Disparities in COPD health outcomes have been found with older individuals, men 
and those of lower socioeconomic status doing worse. We sought to determine if 
this was due to differences in access to COPD medications. We conducted a 
retrospective cohort study using population health administrative data from 
Ontario, Canada, a province with universal prescription drug coverage for older 
adults. All individuals with COPD aged 67 years and older in 2008 who were not 
taking inhaled long-acting bronchodilators or inhaled corticosteroids were 
followed for 2 years. Poisson regression was used to determine the effects of 
age, sex, and socioeconomic status on the likelihood of initiating one of these 
medications, after adjusting for potential confounders. Over the study period, 
54,050 of 185,698 (29.1%) older individuals with COPD not previously taking any 
inhaled long-acting bronchodilators or corticosteroids were initiated on one or 
more of these medications. After adjustment, individuals of low socioeconomic 
status, measured using neighborhood income level quintiles, were slightly more 
likely to initiate COPD medications than those of high socioeconomic status 
(relative risk (RR) 1.05; 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 1.02-1.08). While men 
received COPD medication at a consistent rate across all age groups, the 
likelihood that a woman received medication decreased with increasing age. With 
the exception of older women, there was minimal disparity in prescription for 
COPD medications. Disparity in health outcomes among Ontario COPD patients is 
not clearly explained by differences in medication access by socioeconomic 
status, sex or age.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1020148
PMID: 26244774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Aug 29;11:2017-27. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S110389. eCollection 2016.

The efficacy and safety of combined tiotropium and olodaterol via the 
Respimat(®) inhaler in patients with COPD: results from the Japanese 
sub-population of the Tonado(®) studies.

Ichinose M(1), Taniguchi H(2), Takizawa A(3), Grönke L(4), Loaiza L(4), Voß 
F(4), Zhao Y(5), Fukuchi Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Tosei General Hospital, 
Aichi, Japan.
(3)Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Ridgefield, Connecticut, USA.
(6)Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy and safety of once-daily tiotropium + olodaterol (T+O) 
maintenance treatment was demonstrated in the large, multinational, replicate, 
randomized, Phase III, Tonado(®) 1 (NCT01431274) and 2 (NCT01431287) studies in 
patients with moderate to very severe COPD. However, there may be racial 
differences in the effects of T+O on lung function in patients with COPD.
METHODS: In this Tonado(®) subgroup analysis, we assessed efficacy and safety of 
T+O in Japanese participants.
RESULTS: Versus the overall population, the 413 Japanese patients randomized and 
treated were slightly older, with more men, lower body mass index, lower 
baseline St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scores, fewer current 
smokers, but with higher pack-year smoking history. A lower proportion of 
Japanese patients used inhaled corticosteroids, short-acting muscarinic 
antagonists, or short- or long-acting β-adrenergic agonists at baseline, but use 
of long acting muscarinic antagonists was higher. At Week 24, mean improvements 
with T+O 5/5 μg in forced expiratory volume in 1 second area under the curve 
from 0-3 hours response were 151 mL versus olodaterol and 134 mL versus 
tiotropium 5 μg; mean improvements with T+O 2.5/5 μg were 87 mL versus 
olodaterol and 70 mL versus tiotropium 2.5 μg. Mean improvements with T+O 5/5 μg 
in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second were 131 mL versus olodaterol and 
108 mL versus tiotropium 5 μg; mean improvements with T+O 2.5/5 μg were 60 mL 
versus olodaterol and 47 mL versus tiotropium 2.5 μg. SGRQ scores improved from 
baseline to a greater extent with both doses of T+O versus monotherapies. 
Responses were similar in the overall population. Adverse-event incidence was 
generally balanced across treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: Consistent with results from the overall population, T+O 5/5 μg was 
superior to each monotherapy for lung function and SGRQ in the Japanese 
sub-population of patients with COPD in Tonado(®).

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S110389
PMCID: PMC5010080
PMID: 27621608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Breath Res. 2018 Aug 6;12(4):046007. doi: 10.1088/1752-7163/aad0a8.

Short-term benefit of smoking cessation along with glycopirronium on lung 
function and respiratory symptoms in mild COPD patients: a retrospective study.

Pezzuto A(1), Stellato M, Catania G, Mazzara C, Tonini S, Caricato M, Crucitti 
P, Tonini G.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular-pulmonary Department, Sant' Andrea Hospital-Sapienza 
University, Via di Grottarossa, 1035/39 , I-00189; Rome, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Tobacco smoke is the leading cause of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Smoking cessation can change the natural history of 
COPD, as we know from the GOLD guidelines. Little is known about the short-term 
clinical and functional effects of smoking cessation treatment combined with 
anti-muscarinic bronchodilators.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether quitting smoking, obtained by smoking cessation 
treatment combined with the use of a new long acting muscarinic antagonist 
bronchodilator (LAMA), can improve lung function tests and respiratory symptoms 
more than the use of LAMA alone.
METHODS: We evaluated, in a retrospective analysis, the functional and clinical 
data, collected in one year, of 120 patients who were current smokers affected 
by mild COPD and who quit smoking using smoking cessation treatment combined 
with glycopirronium. We compared them with a group of 80 patients with mild COPD 
undergoing the same treatment but who did not quit smoking. All patients 
underwent functional and clinical tests at baseline and at a third-month check.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The two groups were homogeneous in terms of 
demographic data without significant differences. All patients used varenicline 
for smoking cessation. They all performed the following tests: a spirometry with 
detection of resistances, the 6 min walking test, haemogasanalysis, the exhaled 
CO test, the COPD assessment test (CAT) and finally the modified Medical 
Research Council test (mMRC). A significant improvement in the functional tests 
at the third-month check was found in both groups-quitters and non-quitters. 
However, a notable increase in the examined parameters was registered in the 
group of patients who quit smoking, in particular, we observed a significant 
increase at the third-month check of the parameter forced expiratory volume in 1 
s (FEV1) of more than 200 ml with p < 0.001. A comparison between quitters and 
non-quitters revealed a major benefit derived from smoking cessation in terms of 
functional changes and symptom relief. In particular, not only FEV1 but also 
forced expiratory flow at 25%-75% of vital capacity (FEF 25-75) (p < 0.01) and 
CAT (p < 0.001) were found to be significantly improved in patients who quit 
than in patients who did not at the check time point.
CONCLUSIONS: Smoking cessation treatment obtained by varenicline was confirmed 
as a crucial therapeutic option, especially when combined with bronchodilator in 
mild COPD. Patients who quit smoking could already benefit from both treatments 
in the short term, improving lung function and respiratory symptoms and 
therefore improving their quality of life.

DOI: 10.1088/1752-7163/aad0a8
PMID: 29967309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Dec 5;13:3901-3907. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S181938. eCollection 2018.

Characteristics of 2017 GOLD COPD group A: a multicenter cross-sectional CAP 
study in Japan.

Oishi K(1), Hirano T(2), Hamada K(2), Uehara S(2), Suetake R(2), Yamaji Y(2), 
Ito K(2), Asami-Noyama M(2), Edakuni N(2), Matsunaga K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Yamaguchi University, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan, ohishk@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Disease, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yamaguchi University, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan.

PURPOSE: The 2017 GOLD ABCD classification shifts patients from groups C-D to 
A-B. Group A was the most widely distributed group in several studies. It would 
be useful to understand the characteristics for group A patients, but little has 
been reported concerning these issues.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a multicenter cross-sectional study using the 
COPD Assessment in Practice study database from 15 primary or secondary care 
facilities in Japan. We investigated the clinical characteristics of group A by 
stratification according to a mMRC grade 0 or 1.
RESULTS: In 1,168 COPD patients, group A patients accounted for approximately 
half of the patients. Compared with the groups B-D, group A was younger and had 
a higher proportion of males, higher pulmonary function, and higher proportion 
of monotherapy with long acting muscarinic antagonist or long-acting β-agonist. 
The prevalence of mMRC grade 1 patients was about two-thirds of group A. 
Compared with the mMRC 0 patients, mMRC 1 patients showed a tendency to have a 
higher proportion of exacerbations (P=0.054) and had a significantly lower 
pulmonary function. Regardless of the mMRC grade, 60% of group A patients were 
treated with monotherapy of long acting muscarinic antagonist or long-acting 
β-agonist.
CONCLUSION: Group A patients accounted for approximately half of the patients, 
and they were younger, had higher pulmonary function, and had lower 
pharmacotherapy intensity compared with groups B-D. By stratifying according to 
the mMRC grade 0 or 1 in group A patients, there were differences in the 
exacerbation risk and airflow limitation.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S181938
PMCID: PMC6287652
PMID: 30584291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


257. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(12):1845-60. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.2015.1067682.

A re-evaluation of the role of inhaled corticosteroids in the management of 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

D'Urzo A(1), Donohue JF, Kardos P, Miravitlles M, Price D.

Author information:
(1)University of Toronto, Department of Family and Community Medicine , 500 
University Avenue, 5th Floor, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1V7 , Canada +1 416 652 9336 
; +1 416 652 0218 ; tonydurzo@sympatico.ca.

INTRODUCTION: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) (in fixed combinations with 
long-acting beta-agonists [LABAs]) are frequently prescribed for patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), outside their labeled indications 
and recommended treatment strategies and guidelines, despite having the 
potential to cause significant side effects.
AREAS COVERED: Although the existence of asthma in patients with asthma-COPD 
overlap syndrome (ACOS) clearly supports the use of anti-inflammatory treatment 
(typically an ICS/LABA combination, as ICS monotherapy is usually not indicated 
for COPD), the current level of ICS/LABA use is not consistent with the 
prevalence of ACOS in the COPD population. Data have recently become available 
showing the comparative efficacy of fixed bronchodilator combinations 
(long acting muscarinic antagonist [LAMA]/LABA with ICS/LABA combinations). 
Additionally, new information has emerged on ICS withdrawal without increased 
risk of exacerbations, under cover of effective bronchodilation.
EXPERT OPINION: For patients with COPD who do not have ACOS, a LAMA/LABA 
combination may be an appropriate starting therapy, apart from those with mild 
disease who can be managed with a single long-acting bronchodilator. Patients 
who remain symptomatic or present with exacerbations despite effectively 
delivered LAMA/LABA treatment may require additional drug therapy, such as ICS 
or phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors. When prescribing an ICS/LABA, the 
risk:benefit ratio should be considered in individual patients.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1067682
PMCID: PMC4673525
PMID: 26194213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Respir Res. 2017 Jul 18;18(1):140. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0622-x.

Efficacy and safety of direct switch to indacaterol/glycopyrronium in patients 
with moderate COPD: the CRYSTAL open-label randomised trial.

Vogelmeier CF(1), Gaga M(2), Aalamian-Mattheis M(3), Greulich T(4), Marin 
JM(5)(6), Castellani W(7), Ninane V(8), Lane S(9), Nunez X(10), Patalano F(3), 
Clemens A(3), Kostikas K(3); CRYSTAL study investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Centre Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Member of the 
German Centre for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany. 
claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de.
(2)7th Respiratory Medicine Department, Athens Chest Hospital Sotiria, Athens, 
Greece.
(3)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Centre Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Member of the 
German Centre for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany.
(5)Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain.
(6)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias 
(CIBERES), Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Respiratory Physiopathology, Palagi Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(8)CHU Saint-Pierre - Service de Pneumologie, Brussells, Belgium.
(9)Adelaide & Meath Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(10)TFS Develop, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Dual bronchodilation combining a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) and a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) is the preferred choice of treatment 
recommended by the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
2017 guidelines for the management of patients with moderate-to-severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The once-daily (q.d.) fixed-dose 
combination (FDC) of LABA, indacaterol 110 μg and LAMA, glycopyrronium 50 μg 
(IND/GLY 110/50 μg q.d.) demonstrated superior improvements in lung function, 
dyspnoea and overall health status and better tolerability against LABA or LAMA 
monotherapies and combination of LABA and inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) in more 
than 11,000 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD in several randomised 
controlled clinical trials.
METHODS: The CRYSTAL study was the first, 12-week, randomised, open-label trial 
that evaluated the efficacy and safety of a direct switch from previous 
treatments to IND/GLY 110/50 μg q.d. on lung function and dyspnoea in patients 
with moderate COPD and a history of up to one exacerbation in the previous year. 
Patients were divided into 2 groups according to their background therapy and 
symptom scores and were randomised (3:1) to IND/GLY or to continue with their 
previous treatments.
RESULTS: The study included 4389 randomised patients, of whom 2160 were in 
groups switched to IND/GLY (intention-to-treat population). The effect of 
IND/GLY was superior to LABA + ICS on trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s 
(FEV1; treatment difference, Δ = +71 mL) and transition dyspnoea index (TDI; [Δ 
= 1.09 units]), and to LABA or LAMA on trough FEV1 (Δ = +101 mL) and a TDI 
(Δ = 1.26 units). Improvements in health status and lower rescue medication use 
were also observed with IND/GLY. The safety profile of the study medication was 
similar to that observed in previous studies.
CONCLUSIONS: IND/GLY demonstrated superior improvements in lung function and 
dyspnoea after direct switch from previous treatments.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov number: NCT01985334 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0622-x
PMCID: PMC5516383
PMID: 28720132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study protocol and all amendments were reviewed by an Independent Ethics 
Committee (IEC) or an Institutional Review Board (IRB) for each centre, in each 
country (Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, 
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Portugal, 
Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia [Slovak Republic], Slovenia, Spain, Sweden 
and UK). The study was conducted according to the ethical principles of the 
Declaration of Helsinki. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: Claus F. Vogelmeier (CFV) has received personal fees from Novartis 
during the conduct of the study. Outside the submitted work, he has received 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Grifols, Menarini, Mundipharma and Teva and grants from GlaxoSmithKline and 
Grifols. Mina Gaga (MG) has received grant and personal fees from Novartis, 
Pharmaten and Menarini, outside the submitted work. She has also received 
personal fees from Chiesi, Boehringer Ingelheim and Teva, received compensation 
for organising or participating in advisory boards from GlaxoSmithKline and 
received a grant from AstraZeneca. Maryam Aalamian-Mattheis (MA-M) is an 
employee of Novartis. Timm Greulich (TG) has received compensation from Novartis 
during the conduct of the study. He has also received lecture fees from 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, CSL-Behring, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Mundipharma and 
Novartis, received compensation for organising or participating in advisory 
boards from AstraZeneca, CSL-Behring, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim and Grifols 
and received a grant to support an AATD-Lab from Grifols. Jose M. Marin (JMM) 
does not have anything to disclose. Walter Castellani (WC) has received 
compensation from Novartis during the conduct of the study. Vincent Ninane (VN) 
has received compensation for organising or participating in advisory boards and 
lecture fees from Novartis, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim and MSD, outside 
the submitted work. Stephen Lane (SL) has received speaker fees from Novartis, 
Menarini and Mundipharma, received unrestricted educational grant from Novartis 
during the conduct of the study and received compensation for organising or 
participating in advisory boards from GlaxoSmithKline, ALK Albello and Teva. 
Xavier Nunez (XN) was the statistician for the CRYSTAL study and works at a 
Novartis-contracted CRO. Francesco Patalano (FP), Andreas Clemens (AC) and 
Konstantinos Kostikas (KK) are employees and shareholders of Novartis Pharma AG. 
KK has received honoraria for speeches and/or consulting services from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, ELPEN and Takeda, outside the 
submitted work. None of the authors received any compensation for the 
development of the manuscript. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral 
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


259. J Bronchology Interv Pulmonol. 2017 Apr;24(2):98-103. doi: 
10.1097/LBR.0000000000000333.

Bronchoscopy Safety in Patients With Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease.

Bellinger CR(1), Khan I, Chatterjee AB, Haponik EF.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Pulmonary/Critical Care, Wake Forest Baptist Health†Salem 
Chest Specialists, Winston Salem, NC.

BACKGROUND: Flexible bronchoscopy is a safe and minimally invasive diagnostic 
tool used by pulmonologists, but few studies have prospectively compared 
outcomes in patients with objectively defined obstructive lung disease to those 
without obstruction.
METHODS: We determined whether complications in patients undergoing moderate 
sedation bronchoscopy differ in those without obstruction compared with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We prospectively followed all patients 
undergoing moderate sedation bronchoscopy in an inpatient or outpatient setting.
RESULTS: Over 12 months, data were collected prospectively in 258 patients. A 
total o 151 patients had pulmonary function testing with classification of COPD 
according to GOLD Criteria. Sixty-seven of those patients (44%) had COPD: 6 mild 
(9%), 29 moderate (42%), 27 severe (41%), and 5 very severe (8%). COPD patients 
were more likely to receive outpatient inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting 
bronchodilators and anticholinergics (P<0.001) as would be clinically 
appropriate. Among all patients with COPD, there were 13% minor complications 
and 5% major complications, with no deaths. Respiratory complications occurred 
more often in patients with severe to very severe COPD (22%) compared with 
patients without COPD (6%) (P=0.018). When adjusted for age, body mass index, 
and use of home oxygen, this difference was still significant (P=0.045).
CONCLUSION: Bronchoscopy is generally safe with few complications in most 
patients with COPD. Patients with objectively confirmed severe to very severe 
COPD had more frequent respiratory complications than patients without COPD. The 
risks were not prohibitively high, but should be taken into consideration for 
COPD patients undergoing moderate sedation flexible bronchoscopy.

DOI: 10.1097/LBR.0000000000000333
PMID: 28005831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2018 Aug 27;28(1):32. doi: 10.1038/s41533-018-0099-1.

Systematic literature review and meta-analysis of US-approved LAMA/LABA 
therapies versus tiotropium in moderate-to-severe COPD.

Han MK(1), Ray R(2), Foo J(3), Morel C(3), Hahn B(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)GSK Research, Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)Mapi Group, Houten, The Netherlands.
(4)GSK Research, Triangle Park, NC, USA. Beth.A.Hahn@gsk.com.

Dual bronchodilator maintenance therapy may benefit patients with 
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) versus 
long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) monotherapy. The efficacy and safety of 
US-approved LAMA/long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) combinations versus tiotropium 
(TIO), a LAMA, were assessed. This systematic review and meta-analysis (GSK: 
206938), conducted in MEDLINE, MEDLINE In-process, and EMBASE following 
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines, 
identified randomized clinical trials (>8 weeks) in moderate-to-severe COPD (per 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease guidelines), receiving 
LAMA/LABA or TIO.
ENDPOINTS: difference in change from baseline in lung function (forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s [FEV1]; trough, peak, area under the curve 0-3 h 
post-dose (AUC0-3), St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) responder rate 
(≥4-unit improvement), SGRQ total score, and rescue medication use at 12 and 24 
weeks. Safety was also assessed. From 5683 citations, the meta-analysis included 
eight clinical trials. LAMA/LABA significantly improved FEV1 trough (Week 12: 
63.0 mL, 95% confidence intervals [CI]: 39.2, 86.8; Week 24: 66.1 mL, 95% CI: 
40.0, 92.3), peak (Week 12: 91.5 mL, 95% CI: 70.5, 112.4; Week 24: 92.4 mL, 95% 
CI: 72.9, 111.9), AUC0-3 (Week 12: 126.8 mL, 95% CI: 108.1, 145.4), SGRQ 
responder rate at Week 12 (risk ratio: 1.19; 95% CI: 1.09, 1.28), mean SGRQ 
total score (Week 12: -1.87, 95% CI: -2.72, -1.02; Week 24: -1.05, 95% CI: 
-2.02, -0.09), and rescue medication use (Week 24: -0.47 puffs/day, 95% CI: 
-0.64, -0.30) versus TIO (all p ≤ 0.03). The SGRQ responder rate at 24 weeks and 
adverse events were not significantly different between treatments. US-approved 
LAMA/LABA therapies improved lung function, SGR,Q and rescue medication use 
versus TIO, without compromising safety.

DOI: 10.1038/s41533-018-0099-1
PMCID: PMC6110857
PMID: 30150639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors met the criteria for authorship as 
recommended by the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors. R.R. and 
B.H. are employees of GSK and hold stocks/shares in GSK, but received no direct 
compensation related to the development of this manuscript. M.K.H. is an 
employee of University of Michigan, and J.F. and C.M. are employees of MAPI, a 
healthcare consulting company contracted by GSK for the conduct of this study. 
Anoro is owned by or licensed to the GSK group of companies. Respimat, 
Handihaler, and Stiolto are registered trademarks of Boehringer Ingelheim. 
Bevespi is a registered trademark of the AstraZeneca group of companies and 
Utibron is a trademark of Novartis AG, used under license.


261. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 3;14:2003-2013. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S210897. eCollection 2019.

Trends in prescriptions and costs of inhaled medications in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: a 19-year population-based study from Canada.

Tavakoli H(1), Johnson KM(1), FitzGerald JM(2), Sin DD(3), Gershon AS(4), 
Kendzerska T(5), Sadatsafavi M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Evaluation Sciences Program, Collaboration for Outcomes Research 
and Evaluation, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Institute for Heart and Lung Health, Department of Medicine, The University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation (the James Hogg Research Centre), St. Paul's 
Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Respirology, The Ottawa Hospital Research 
Institute/University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The patterns of medication use in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) may change over time due to the availability of new medications, 
updates in guideline-based recommendations, and changes in patient and care 
provider preferences.
OBJECTIVES: To document population-level trends of filled prescriptions and 
costs for major classes of inhaled COPD therapies.
METHOD: We used administrative health databases of the province of British 
Columbia, Canada, from 1997 to 2015, to create a retrospective cohort of COPD 
patients. We documented the percentage of patients receiving major inhaled 
COPD-related medications, including short-acting beta-2 adrenoreceptor agonists 
(SABA), long-acting beta-2 adrenoreceptor agonists (LABA), inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS), short-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (SAMA), and 
long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMA). We quantified the average, 
and relative annual change in, dispensed quantities and costs (in 2015 Canadian 
dollars [$]) of medications. Combination therapy was assessed as the proportion 
of time covered by two or more long-acting medications of different classes.
RESULTS: A total of 176,338 patients were included in the final cohort (mean age 
at entry 68.7, 48.5% female). In 2015, the most common medication was ICS (45.7% 
of the patients), followed by LABA (36.5%). LAMA was the least used medication 
(18.9%). The number of filled prescriptions per patient per year for LAMA (+7.8% 
per year) and LABA (+4.9%) increased, while they decreased for SAMA (-6.3%) and 
SABA (-3.8%), and remained relatively constant for ICS. The average annual 
per-patient costs of inhaled medications were $570.8 in 2015, which was double 
the costs from 1997. Single-inhaler ICS/LABA had the highest rate of increase 
(11.6% per year), and comprised 53.7% of the total costs of inhalers in 2015. In 
2015, 28.5% of the patient time was on combination therapies, with 7.1% on 
triple ICS/LABA/LAMA therapy.
CONCLUSION: Utilization of inhaled therapies for COPD has changed significantly 
over time. The low utilization of LAMA and high utilization of combination 
therapies (particularly those containing ICS) do not seem to be aligned with 
COPD treatment guidelines.

© 2019 Tavakoli et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S210897
PMCID: PMC6732655
PMID: 31564848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was funded by the Canadian 
Respiratory Research Network (CRRN). CRRN is supported by grants from the 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)-Institute of Circulatory and 
Respiratory Health, Canadian Lung Association (CLA)/Canadian Thoracic Society 
(CTS), British Columbia Lung Association, and Industry Partners 
Boehringer-Ingelheim Canada Ltd, AstraZeneca Canada Inc., and Novartis Canada 
Ltd. Funding for the training of postdoctoral students and new investigators 
within the network was supported by the above funding Sponsors and as well by 
GlaxoSmithKline Inc. Dr Sadatsafavi receives salary support from the Michael 
Smith Foundation for Health Research and the Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research and reports personal fees from GSK and grants from AstraZeneca Canada, 
outside the submitted work. None of the authors have declared any other actual 
or perceived conflicts of interest in this work.


262. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2016 Aug;15(8):1115-24. doi: 
10.1080/14740338.2016.1199682. Epub 2016 Jun 20.

Tiotropium for the treatment of asthma: a drug safety evaluation.

Kerstjens HA(1), O'Byrne PM(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Tuberculosis and Groningen Research 
Institute for Asthma and COPD , University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands.
(2)b Department of Medicine , Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health, 
McMaster University , Hamilton , ON , Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Tiotropium, a once-daily long acting beta agonists 
bronchodilator, has recently been approved for use in the treatment of asthma in 
a number of countries, including the EU and the USA, and was incorporated into 
the 2015 update of the Global Initiative for Asthma treatment guidelines. Here 
we review safety data from published clinical trials to help inform the use of 
tiotropium in the treatment of patients with asthma.
AREAS COVERED: Safety data from recently published clinical trials, which 
compared tiotropium with placebo or an active control, were reviewed. Trials 
included children, adolescents, and adults across severities of symptomatic 
asthma, and assessed tiotropium delivered via the Respimat and HandiHaler 
devices.
EXPERT OPINION: Based on the reviewed scientific evidence, tiotropium is a safe 
and well-tolerated long acting beta agonists bronchodilator for use in the 
treatment of asthma. In the trials assessed, the safety of tiotropium was found 
to be comparable with that of placebo and alternative therapeutic options, 
including a doubling in the dose of inhaled corticosteroids and the long-acting 
beta-agonist salmeterol.

DOI: 10.1080/14740338.2016.1199682
PMID: 27279414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Pharmacoeconomics. 2017 Jan;35(1):43-63. doi: 10.1007/s40273-016-0448-2.

Systematic Review and Quality Appraisal of Cost-Effectiveness Analyses of 
Pharmacologic Maintenance Treatment for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: 
Methodological Considerations and Recommendations.

van der Schans S(1), Goossens LMA(2), Boland MRS(2), Kocks JWH(3), Postma 
MJ(1)(4)(5), van Boven JFM(6)(7), Rutten-van Mölken MPMH(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Department of Pharmacy, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Health Policy and Management, Erasmus University Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of General Practice, Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and 
COPD (GRIAC), University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, 
Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Institute of Science in Healthy Aging & healthcaRE (SHARE), University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University 
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of General Practice, Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and 
COPD (GRIAC), University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, 
Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, The Netherlands. 
j.f.m.van.boven@rug.nl.
(7)Center for Pharmaceutical Outcomes Research, School of Pharmacy, University 
of Colorado, Denver, CO, USA. j.f.m.van.boven@rug.nl.

BACKGROUND: Worldwide, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a highly 
prevalent chronic lung disease with considerable clinical and socioeconomic 
impact. Pharmacologic maintenance drugs (such as bronchodilators and inhaled 
corticosteroids) play an important role in the treatment of COPD. The cost 
effectiveness of these treatments has been frequently assessed, but studies to 
date have largely neglected the impact of treatment sequence and the exact stage 
of disease in which the drugs are used in real life.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to systematically review recently published articles that 
reported the cost effectiveness of COPD maintenance treatments, with a focus on 
key findings, quality and methodological issues.
METHODS: We performed a systematic literature search in Embase, PubMed, the UK 
NHS Economic Evaluation Database (NHS-EED) and EURONHEED (European Network of 
Health Economics Evaluation Databases) and included all relevant articles 
published between 2011 and 2015 in either Dutch, English or German. Main study 
characteristics, methods and outcomes were extracted and critically assessed. 
The Quality of Health Economic Studies (QHES) instrument was used as basis for 
quality assessment, but additional items were also addressed.
RESULTS: The search identified 18 recent pharmacoeconomic analyses of COPD 
maintenance treatments. Papers reported the cost effectiveness of long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) monotherapy (n = 6), phosphodiesterase (PDE)-4 
inhibitors (n = 4), long-acting beta agonist/inhaled corticosteroid (LABA/ICS) 
combinations (n = 4), LABA monotherapy (n = 2) and LABA/LAMA combinations 
(n = 2). All but two studies were funded by the manufacturer, and all studies 
indicated favourable cost effectiveness; however, the number of quality-adjusted 
life-years (QALYs) gained was small. Less than half of the studies reported a 
COPD-specific outcome in addition to a generic outcome (mostly QALYs). 
Exacerbation and mortality rates were found to be the main drivers of cost 
effectiveness. According to the QHES, the quality of the studies was generally 
sufficient, but additional assessment revealed that most studies poorly 
represented the cost effectiveness of real-life medication use.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of studies showed that pharmacologic COPD maintenance 
treatment is cost effective, but most studies poorly reflected real-life drug 
use. Consistent and COPD-specific methodology is recommended.

DOI: 10.1007/s40273-016-0448-2
PMCID: PMC5209411
PMID: 27592021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with Ethical Standards Competing 
interests SvdS has no competing interests. JvB, JK and MJP are employed at the 
University of Groningen, which has received research grants from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, AstraZeneca and GlaxoSmithKline, all manufacturers of some of the 
respiratory drugs described in this article. JK has received several research 
grants and has been paid for consultancy services by AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline and Novartis, companies that produce drugs reviewed 
in this paper. MJP has received grants and honoraria from various pharmaceutical 
companies, including those developing, producing and marketing COPD drugs. MRM, 
LG and MB are employed by the Erasmus University Rotterdam, which has received 
research grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, and Almirall, manufacturers of respiratory drugs. Funding 
No funding was received for this study.


264. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2017 Nov 15;11:3257-3271. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S135377. 
eCollection 2017.

Role of nebulized glycopyrrolate in the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Santus P(1), Radovanovic D(1), Cristiano A(1), Valenti V(2), Rizzi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (DIBIC), University of Milan, 
Division of Respiratory Diseases, "L. Sacco" Hospital, ASST Fatebenefratelli 
Sacco, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Health Bioscience, University of Milan - Respiratory Unit, 
Policlinico di San Donato, IRCCS - San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy.

In the upcoming years, the proportion of elderly patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) will increase, according to the 
progressively aging population and the increased efficacy of the pharmacological 
treatments, especially considering the management of chronic comorbidities. The 
issue to prescribe an appropriate inhalation therapy to COPD patients with 
significant handling or coordination difficulties represents a common clinical 
experience; in the latter case, the choice of an inadequate inhalation device 
may jeopardize the adherence to the treatment and eventually lead to its 
ineffectiveness. Treatment options that do not require particular timing for 
coordination between activation and/or inhalation or require high flow 
thresholds to be activated should represent the best treatment option for these 
patients. Nebulized bronchodilators, usually used only in acute conditions such 
as COPD exacerbations, could fulfill this gap, enabling an adequate drug 
administration during tidal breathing and without the need for patients' 
cooperation. However, so far, only short-acting muscarinic antagonists have been 
available for nebulization. Recently, a nebulized formulation of the inhaled 
long acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrrolate, delivered by means of a novel 
proprietary vibrating mesh nebulizer closed system (SUN-101/eFlow®), has 
progressed to Phase III trials and is currently in late-stage development as an 
option for maintenance treatment in COPD. The present critical review describes 
the current knowledge about the novel nebulizer technology, the efficacy, 
safety, and critical role of nebulized glycopyrrolate in patients with COPD. To 
this end, PubMed, ClinicalTrials.gov, Embase, and Cochrane Library have been 
searched for relevant papers. According to the available results, the efficacy 
and tolerability profile of nebulized glycopyrrolate may represent a valuable 
and dynamic treatment option for the chronic pharmacological management of 
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S135377
PMCID: PMC5695264
PMID: 29180850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure PS has received financial support for 
research from Pfizer, Almirall, Chiesi Farmaceutici, and AirLiquide. He has 
received honoraria for lectures at national meetings from Chiesi Farmaceutici, 
Novartis, Zambon Italia, AstraZeneca, Almirall, GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Menarini, and Malesci-Guidotti. He has served as consultant for 
Zambon Italia, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Chiesi Farmaceutici, and Boehringer 
Ingelheim. DR has received honoraria for lectures from Astra Zeneca and 
Boehringer Ingelheim. AC, VV, and MR report no conflicts of interest in this 
work.


265. Respir Med. 2017 Oct;131:77-84. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.08.008. Epub 2017 Aug 
9.

GOLD 2017 treatment pathways in 'real life': An analysis of the DACCORD 
observational study.

Worth H(1), Buhl R(2), Criée CP(3), Kardos P(4), Lossi NS(5), Vogelmeier CF(6).

Author information:
(1)Facharztforum Fürth, 90762 Fürth, Germany. Electronic address: 
heinrich.worth@t-online.de.
(2)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, 55131 Mainz, Germany.
(3)Department of Sleep and Respiratory Medicine, Evangelical Hospital 
Goettingen-Weende, 37120 Bovenden, Germany.
(4)Group Practice and Centre for Allergy, Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Red 
Cross Maingau Hospital, 60318 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(5)Clinical Research, Respiratory, Novartis Pharma GmbH, D-90429 Nürnberg, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-University Marburg, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 35043 Marburg, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: The 2017 update to the Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung 
Disease (GOLD) strategy document includes recommendations for treatment 
intensification or step-down in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
although recognises that limited supporting information is available. DACCORD is 
an ongoing observational, non-interventional study, recruiting patients 
following COPD maintenance treatment change or initiation, a subset of whom were 
receiving a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) plus a long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) fixed-dose combination (FDC) on entry. Since there were no 
requirements in terms of prior medication (and no washout before commencing 
LABA/LAMA FDC), this provides an opportunity to generate 'real world' data to 
test the GOLD 2017 recommendations.
METHODS: To reduce heterogeneity, the current analyses include patients 
receiving indacaterol/glycopyrronium at baseline, and who, prior to the study, 
were receiving no COPD maintenance medication ('none'), LABA or LAMA monotherapy 
('mono'), LABA plus inhaled corticosteroid (ICS; 'LABA/ICS'), or triple therapy 
('triple'). At the baseline visit, data collected included: demographic and 
disease characteristics; COPD Assessment Test (CAT); and exacerbations in the 6 
months prior to entry. At 3, 6, 9 and 12 months data on exacerbations were 
collected, with CAT recorded at 3 and 12 months.
RESULTS: A total of 2724 patients were included in the baseline analyses: 795, 
954, 598 and 377 in the 'none', 'mono', 'LABA/ICS' and 'triple' subgroups, 
respectively. There were no clinically relevant differences in baseline 
demographics between the four groups. In terms of disease characteristics, the 
'triple' group had the highest proportion of patients with a disease duration of 
more than 1 year since diagnosis and with severe/very severe airflow limitation, 
but a similar percentage of non-exacerbators compared to the 'none' group. Over 
the 1-year follow-up, the majority of patients in all four subgroups did not 
exacerbate (exacerbation rates 0.16, 0.19, 0.21, and 0.26 in the 'none', 'mono', 
'LABA/ICS' and 'triple' groups, respectively). At 12 months, 61.4%, 65.0%, 71.0% 
and 52.4% of patients had a clinically relevant improvement in CAT score.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the results support the GOLD recommendations in suggesting 
that a switch from a mono-bronchodilator or LABA plus ICS to LABA/LAMA FDC is a 
valid treatment option for patients with COPD. The results also validate the use 
of a LABA/LAMA FDC as initial maintenance treatment for COPD, and provide first 
'real world' evidence to support the newly added 'step down' recommendation 
(from triple to LABA/LAMA FDC).

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.08.008
PMID: 28947047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2015 Jan;21(1):103-8. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000126.

Role of anticholinergics in asthma management: recent evidence and future needs.

Rogers L(1), Hanania NA.

Author information:
(1)aSection of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York bSection of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Anticholinergic antimuscarinic bronchodilators play a major 
role in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but their role 
in asthma has long been limited to acute management. More recently, the role of 
long-acting antimuscarinic bronchodilators (LAMAs) in chronic asthma management 
has been explored. This review will examine the pharmacological rationale for 
use of inhaled anticholinergics in the treatment of asthma, and provide an 
overview of the current literature supporting this use, as well as describe 
future research needs in this area.
RECENT FINDINGS: Short-acting anticholinergic bronchodilators have a role as 
add-on agents in the treatment of acute asthma. Preliminary clinical studies 
suggest that inhaled LAMAs may be comparable to long-acting beta2-agonists 
(LABAs) as an add-on therapy in patients not controlled by inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) alone, and may also have added benefit in patients not 
controlled on combined ICS-LABA. Mechanistic studies suggest that apart from 
their bronchodilator activity, LAMAs may have anti-inflammatory and 
antiremodeling influences on the airways. Further research is needed to clarify 
the clinical relevance of these experimental observations.
SUMMARY: Accumulating evidence supports the use of inhaled LAMAs as an add-on 
therapy in patients with asthma, who remain symptomatic despite guideline-based 
therapy with ICS with or without LABAs. Further studies are warranted to help 
define mechanisms of action of LAMAs, apart from their role as bronchodilators, 
and determine how these other actions impact asthma outcomes over time. 
Furthermore, future studies need to examine the long-term efficacy and safety of 
LAMAs in asthma and identify a subgroup of patients who would benefit from such 
therapies to facilitate early, personalized therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000126
PMID: 25415409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2019 Apr;20(6):737-750. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2019.1570133. Epub 2019 Feb 1.

Inhaled therapies and cardiovascular risk in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Rogliani P(1)(2), Calzetta L(1), Matera MG(3), di Daniele N(4), Girolami A(1), 
Cazzola M(1), Ora J(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Experimental Medicine , University of Rome "Tor Vergata" , 
Rome , Italy.
(2)b Division of Respiratory Medicine , University Hospital "Tor Vergata" , Rome 
, Italy.
(3)c Department of Experimental Medicine , University of Campania Luigi 
Vanvitelli , Naples , Italy.
(4)d Department of Systems Medicine , University of Rome "Tor Vergata" , Rome , 
Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) therapy includes a 
multi-dimensional approach, taking into account both symptoms of the patient and 
the number of acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPDs). There are three main 
pharmaceutical classes currently available including long acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMA), long-acting beta-agonists (LABA) and inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS). COPD is a major risk factor for most cardiovascular diseases, and cardiac 
comorbidities are very common in COPD patients. Both LAMA and LABA have a 
considerable impact on cardiac function by stimulating cardiac beta-adrenergic 
receptors or inhibiting the heart M2 muscarinic receptors. ICS alone or in 
combination has never been associated with a real cardiovascular risk.
AREAS COVERED: This review explores the data published on the safety of COPD 
therapy and the implications for current pharmacotherapy.
EXPERT OPINION: Several studies have confirmed the good safety profile of 
bronchodilators available both in monotherapy and in association with other 
bronchodilators of different classes or with ICS despite the device used. 
Cardiovascular events in clinical trials are generally low and balanced between 
groups. The actual cardiovascular risk of fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) in an 
unselected COPD population will need to be investigated through post-marketing 
surveillance studies and observational studies.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2019.1570133
PMID: 30707637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Respir Res. 2017 Mar 11;18(1):46. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0529-6.

Combination of glycopyrronium and indacaterol inhibits carbachol-induced ERK5 
signal in fibrotic processes.

Namba Y(1)(2), Togo S(3)(4), Tulafu M(1)(2), Kadoya K(1)(2), Nagahama KY(1)(2), 
Taka H(5), Kaga N(5), Orimo A(6), Liu X(7), Takahashi K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine & 
Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.
(2)Research Institute for Diseases of Old Ages, Juntendo University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.
(3)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine & 
Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan. 
shinsaku@juntendo.ac.jp.
(4)Research Institute for Diseases of Old Ages, Juntendo University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan. 
shinsaku@juntendo.ac.jp.
(5)Laboratory of Proteomics and Biomolecular Science, Research Support Center, 
Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 
113-8421, Japan.
(6)Departments of Pathology and Oncology, Juntendo University School of 
Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.
(7)Pulmonary Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

BACKGROUND: Airway fibrosis is one of the pathological features of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and recent studies revealed that 
acetylcholine plays an important role in the development of airway remodeling by 
stimulating proliferation and collagen synthesis of lung fibroblasts. This study 
was designed to examine the effects of a long acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonist (LAMA) glycopyrronium and a long-acting beta adrenergic receptor 
agonist (LABA) indacaterol on acetylcholine-mediated fibrotic responses in lung 
fibroblasts.
METHODS: After carbachol (CCh) or transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) 
exposure, the response to glycopyrronium and indacaterol was determined in vitro 
in fibroblasts isolated from mild-to-moderate COPD lung tissue. The ability of 
fibroblasts to mediate the contraction of collagen gels was assessed. The 
expression of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and the phosphorylation of 
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 5 (ERK5) were determined by immunoblot. 
TGF-β1 was quantified by ELISA and acetylcholine was quantified by liquid 
chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: CCh stimulated fibroblast-mediated collagen gel contraction and α-SMA 
expression and TGF-β1 release by fibroblasts. Blockade of autocrine TGF-β1 
attenuated CCh-mediated fibrotic responses, while TGF-β1 did not stimulate 
acetylcholine release. Glycopyrronium plus indacaterol significantly attenuated 
CCh- and TGF-β1-mediated fibrotic responses through inhibition of ERK5 
phosphorylation. Notably, the magnitudes of CCh- and TGF-β1-stimulated gel 
contraction, CCh-induced TGF-β1 release, and ERK5 phosphorylation were greater 
in fibroblasts isolated from COPD subjects than in those from non-smokers.
CONCLUSIONS: CCh induced TGF-β1 self-sustaining signaling loops by potentiating 
ERK5 signaling and promoted myofibroblast activity. This autocrine signaling 
mechanism may be an attractive therapeutic target to block the fibrotic 
response, which was modulated by the combination of glycopyrronium and 
indacaterol.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0529-6
PMCID: PMC5346259
PMID: 28284212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Can Respir J. 2018 Jul 15;2018:7097540. doi: 10.1155/2018/7097540. eCollection 
2018.

Risk of Cardiovascular Events Associated with Inhaled Corticosteroid Treatment 
in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Meta-Analysis.

Jing X(1), Li Y(2), Xu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Shanxi Dayi Hospital Affiliated to Shanxi 
Medical University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Shanxi Dayi Hospital Affiliated to Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.

BACKGROUND: The cardiovascular (CV) safety of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is controversial because different 
studies have suggested that ICSs either increase or reduce the risk of CV events 
in COPD patients. In this meta-analysis, we assess the CV safety of ICS therapy 
in COPD.
METHODS: A meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, 
placebo-controlled trials of ICS treatment for COPD that include at least 4 
weeks of follow-up was performed. A random-effects model was used to evaluate 
the effects of ICS treatment on CV events. CV events were documented in each 
trial, and the relative risk (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for ICSs 
were estimated.
RESULTS: Thirty-one trials were included in this meta-analysis. The risk of CV 
events was not different between ICS-treated and control groups (RR: 0.99; 95% 
CI: 0.93 to 1.06; P=0.801). In a subgroup analysis, there were no significant 
differences in CV events between an ICS combined with long-acting beta agonist 
(LABA) (ICS + LABA) group and an LABA-only group (RR: 1.00; 95% CI: 0.90 to 
1.10; P=0.930), as well as between a combination group (ICS + LABA) and a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) combined with LABA (LAMA + LABA) group 
(RR: 0.78; 95% CI: 0.39 to 1.55; P=0.473). In addition, there was no difference 
in the risk of CV events between ICS treatment and control groups (RR: 0.99; 95% 
CI: 0.90 to 1.09; P=0.872).
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that ICSs do not increase the risk of CV 
events in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/7097540
PMCID: PMC6079461
PMID: 30123392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Trials. 2017 Feb 22;18(1):80. doi: 10.1186/s13063-017-1800-3.

Efficacy and safety of indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination in 
mild-to-moderate COPD patients symptomatic on tiotropium in Korea: study 
protocol for a randomized controlled trial.

Rhee CK(1), Park HY(2), Park JW(3), Lee JH(4), Kim TH(5), Lee SW(6), Jung JY(7), 
Kim S(8), Hwang YI(9), Jung KS(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South 
Korea.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Allergy Medicine, Gachon University, Gil Medical 
Center, Incheon, South Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Bundang CHA Medical Center, CHA University 
College of Medicine, Seongnam, South Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Hanyang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(6)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(7)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Severance Hospital, 
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(8)Novartis Korea Ltd., Seoul, South Korea.
(9)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University Medical 
School, 896 Pyeongan-dong, Dongan-gu, 431-070, Anyang-si, Gyeonggi-do, South 
Korea. hyicyk@gmail.com.
(10)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University Medical 
School, 896 Pyeongan-dong, Dongan-gu, 431-070, Anyang-si, Gyeonggi-do, South 
Korea. pulmoks@hallym.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilator monotherapy (long-acting beta-agonist 
[LABA] or long acting muscarinic antagonist [LAMA]) is extensively used for 
treatment of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with 
mild-to-moderate airflow limitation. However, a substantial number of patients 
remain symptomatic despite treatment with a single bronchodilator, necessitating 
a change in therapy.
METHODS: This 12-week, randomized, multicenter, open-label, phase IV study aims 
to show that the once-daily indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) 110/50 μg 
fixed-dose LABA/LAMA combination results in an improved lung function in 
symptomatic patients with mild-to-moderate COPD who switch from once-daily 
tiotropium 18 μg. The study aims to enroll a total of 404 symptomatic patients 
in Korea with mild-to-moderate COPD who received tiotropium for at least 12 
weeks prior to the study initiation. The primary objective of this study is to 
demonstrate the superiority of IND/GLY over tiotropium in terms of trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) following 12 weeks of treatment. Secondary 
endpoints include the pre-dose trough FEV1 after 4 weeks of treatment, 
transition dyspnea index (TDI) total score, COPD assessment test (CAT) total 
score, and rescue medication use following the 12-week treatment, and safety 
assessment over the 12-week treatment.
DISCUSSION: This study intends to establish the use of LABA/LAMA combination 
therapy in symptomatic patients with mild-to-moderate COPD by demonstrating the 
superiority of IND/GLY over tiotropium monotherapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02566031 . Registered on 10 August 
2015.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-017-1800-3
PMCID: PMC5322667
PMID: 28228162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Respir Res. 2017 Jan 11;18(1):13. doi: 10.1186/s12931-016-0498-1.

Indacaterol and glycopyrronium versus indacaterol on body plethysmography 
measurements in COPD-a randomised controlled study.

Salomon J(1), Stolz D(2), Domenighetti G(3), Frey JG(4), Turk AJ(5), Azzola 
A(6), Sigrist T(7), Fitting JW(8), Schmidt U(9), Geiser T(10), Wild C(11), 
Kostikas K(12), Clemens A(13), Brutsche M(14).

Author information:
(1)Lung Centre Salem-Spital, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Regional Hospital La Carità, Locarno, Switzerland.
(4)Hospital du Valais, Sion, Switzerland.
(5)Hospital, Zürcher Rehazentrum Wald, Wald, Switzerland.
(6)Regional Hospital Civico, Lugano, Switzerland.
(7)Hospital, Klinik Barmelweid, Barmelweid, Switzerland.
(8)Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(9)Kliniken Valens, Rehabilitation Centre, Walenstadtberg, St. Gallen, 
Switzerland.
(10)University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(11)Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland.
(12)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(13)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. andreas.clemens@novartis.com.
(14)Cantonal Hospital, St. Gallen, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Dual bronchodilator therapy is recommended for symptomatic patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There are limited data on 
effects of a combination of two long-acting bronchodilators on lung function 
including body plethysmography.
METHODS: This multicentre, randomised, double-blind, single-dose, cross-over, 
placebo-controlled study evaluated efficacy and safety of the free combination 
of indacaterol maleate (IND) and glycopyrronium bromide (GLY) versus IND alone 
on spirometric and body plethysmography parameters, including inspiratory 
capacity (IC), forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), forced vital capacity 
(FVC), total lung capacity (TLC) and airway resistance (Raw) in 
moderate-to-severe COPD patients.
RESULTS: Seventy-eight patients with FEV1 % pred. (mean ± SD) 56 ± 13% were 
randomised. The combination of IND + GLY versus IND presented a numerically 
higher peak-IC (Δ = 0.076 L, 95% confidence interval [CI]: -0.010 - 0.161 L; 
p = 0.083), with a statistically significant difference in mean IC over 4 h 
(Δ = 0.054 L, 95%CI 0.022 - 0.086 L; p = 0.001). FEV1, FVC and Raw, but not TLC, 
were consistently significantly improved by IND + GLY compared to IND alone. 
Safety profiles of both treatments were comparable.
CONCLUSION: The free combination of IND + GLY improved lung function parameters 
as evaluated by spirometry and body plethysmography, with a similar safety 
profile compared to IND alone.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01699685.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-016-0498-1
PMCID: PMC5225517
PMID: 28077140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2015 Oct;9(5):519-32. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2015.1081065. 
Epub 2015 Aug 26.

Dual bronchodilator therapy with aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate for 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

D'Urzo T(1), Donohue JF(2), Price D(3), Miravitlles M(4), Kerwin E(5).

Author information:
(1)a 1 Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)b 2 University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)c 3 University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(4)d 4 Department of Pneumology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)e 5 Clinical Research Institute, Medford, OR, USA.

Inhaled bronchodilator therapy is a mainstay of treatment for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Despite the number and types of treatments 
available, the control of symptoms and exacerbations remains suboptimal, and 
adherence to, and persistence with, inhaled therapy is generally poor. Results 
from clinical studies suggest that dual bronchodilator therapy with long-acting 
muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMAs) and long-acting beta adrenergic receptor 
agonists (LABAs) may provide additional benefit over LAMA or LABA monotherapy 
without additive effects on safety and tolerability. Several combinations of a 
LAMA plus a LABA have recently become available in a single inhaler for 
maintenance therapy for adults with moderate-to-severe COPD, including 
aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate, glycopyrronium/indacaterol and 
umeclidinium/vilanterol. Here, we review clinical data demonstrating significant 
improvements in bronchodilation, 24-h symptoms, and health status with 
aclidinium/formoterol twice daily, and discuss how this treatment can be 
implemented in clinical practice as part of a patient-focused approach to 
disease control.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2015.1081065
PMID: 26366803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Jun;9(6):771-7. doi: 
10.1586/17512433.2016.1169173. Epub 2016 Apr 7.

Aclidinium bromide inhalation powder for the long-term, maintenance treatment of 
bronchospasm associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease including 
chronic bronchitis and emphysema.

Matera MG(1), Sanduzzi A(2), Alfano R(3), Cazzola M(4).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Experimental Medicine , Second University of Naples , Naples 
, Italy.
(2)b Department of Respiratory Diseases , Monaldi Hospital, University Federico 
II , Naples , Italy.
(3)c Department of Anaesthesiological, Surgical and Emergency Sciences , Second 
University of Naples , Naples , Italy.
(4)d Department of Systems Medicine , University of Rome Tor Vergata , Rome , 
Italy.

Aclidinium is a twice-daily long acting muscarinic receptor antagonist (LAMA) 
with an interesting pharmacological profile. Recent evidence indicates that this 
LAMA, in addition to causing a significant improvement in lung function and 
other important supportive outcomes, such as health related quality of life, 
dyspnea and nighttime/early morning symptoms in patients suffering from COPD, is 
also able to significantly reduce the rate of exacerbations of any severity, is 
extremely effective in controlling the COPD symptoms, is able to reduce lung 
hyperinflation, and has an excellent cardiovascular safety profile. 
Consequently, aclidinium should be considered a first-line approach at least for 
the symptomatic treatment of COPD although there are still few head-to-head 
studies comparing this LAMA with other bronchodilators. In any case, aclidinium 
can be taken into account in the treatment of different COPD phenotypes 
(emphysema, chronic bronchitis, exacerbators and patients with overlap COPD 
asthma).

DOI: 10.1586/17512433.2016.1169173
PMID: 26998725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Med J Aust. 2019 May;210(9):424-428. doi: 10.5694/mja2.50138. Epub 2019 Apr 11.

Precision health: treating the individual patient with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Obeidat M(1)(2), Sadatsafavi M(1), Sin DD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(2)St Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, Canada.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is defined based on a reduced ratio 
of forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1 ) to forced vital capacity (FVC) 
on spirometry. However, within this definition, there is significant 
heterogeneity of pathophysiological processes that lead to airflow obstruction 
and variation in phenotypic manifestations across patients. Current 
pharmacological treatments are based on large randomised clinical trials that 
apply to an "average" patient. Precision health enables tailoring of treatment 
for each individual patient by taking into account their unique characteristics. 
The number needed to treat (NNT) metric is often used to define implementation 
of precision health for specific interventions, with common endpoints requiring 
an NNT ≤ 5 to achieve precision therapy. Higher NNTs may be acceptable for rare 
but important endpoints such as mortality. long acting muscarinic antagonists 
and inhaled corticosteroids, which are commonly used in COPD, have 1-year 
treatment NNTs between 15 and 20 for exacerbation prevention in unselected 
patients with COPD. Subgroup identification using biomarkers or clinical traits 
may enable precision health. For example, NNT for inhaled corticosteroids is 9 
in patients with a blood eosinophil count ≥ 300 cells/μL and 8 for long-acting 
muscarinic antagonists in patients with a body mass index ≤ 20 kg/m2 . Lung 
volume reduction surgery is associated with an NNT of 6 for survival over 5 
years in patients with upper lobe-predominant disease and low exercise capacity 
(whereas the NNT is 245 when no bioimaging or exercise markers are used). 
Continuous domiciliary oxygen therapy (for at least 15 hours/day) has an NNT of 
5 for survival over 5 years in patients with resting hypoxemia (PaO2  < 60 mmHg 
on room air). Emerging areas of precision health in COPD with potential for low 
NNTs in specific circumstances include anti-interleukin-5 therapy for 
eosinophilic COPD, and immunoglobulin replacement therapy for patients with 
severe immunoglobulin deficiency.

© 2019 AMPCo Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.5694/mja2.50138
PMID: 30977152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Eur J Pharmacol. 2015 Aug 15;761:168-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2015.05.020. Epub 
2015 May 14.

Pharmacological interaction between LABAs and LAMAs in the airways: optimizing 
synergy.

Calzetta L(1), Matera MG(2), Cazzola M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, 
Italy. Electronic address: luigicalz@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, 
Italy.

Nowadays there is solid clinical information for combining beta-agonists and 
anti-muscarinic agents, although the nature (additive or synergistic) of the net 
clinical result obtained by co-administration of these two classes of 
bronchodilators is not completely elucidated from a pharmacological point of 
view. Recent preclinical studies demonstrated that combining a long-acting 
beta-agonist (LABA) with a long-acting anti-muscarinic agent (LAMA) provides 
synergistic benefit on airway smooth muscle relaxation, which may have major 
implications for the use of LABA/LAMA combinations in the treatment COPD. 
Indeed, the LABA/LAMA synergism has been proved also in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD. Nevertheless, there is still a strong medical need for 
dose-finding clinical trials designed to identify the most favourable doses of 
LABA/LAMA combinations able to induce a real synergism. We strongly believe that 
the Bliss Independence theory represents an effective model for investigating 
the cross-talk between beta-adrenoreceptor and the muscarinic pathways leading to 
the synergistic interaction between beta-agonists and anti-muscarinic agents. In 
any case, the possibility of eliciting a synergistic bronchodilator effect when 
combining a LABA and a LAMA suggests that the therapeutic approach proposed by 
GOLD recommendations to only use LABA/LAMA combination in more severe COPD 
patients who are not controlled by a single bronchodilator should be 
reconsidered. We support the possibility of an early intervention with low doses 
of LABA/LAMA combination to optimize bronchodilation and reduce the risk of 
adverse events that characterize both LABAs and LAMAs, especially when 
administered at the full doses currently approved for the treatment of COPD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2015.05.020
PMID: 25981302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Chron Respir Dis. 2017 Nov;14(4):385-391. doi: 10.1177/1479972317702141. Epub 
2017 Jun 15.

Implementation of guideline-based therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: Differences between men and women veterans.

Rinne ST(1), Elwy AR(2)(3), Liu CF(4)(5), Wiener RS(1)(6), Thayer L(7), Gerity 
A(7), Bastian LA(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)1 Center for Healthcare Organization & Implementation Research, Edith Nourse 
Rogers Memorial VA Hospital, Bedford, MA, USA.
(2)2 Department of Veterans Affairs, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(3)3 Department of Health Law, Policy and Management, Boston University School 
of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)4 Department of Veterans Affairs, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)5 Department of Health Services, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)6 The Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(7)7 Pain Research, Informatics, Multimorbidity, & Education Center, VA 
Connecticut Healthcare System, Department of Veterans Affairs, West Haven, CT, 
USA.
(8)8 Department of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is common among both men and women, 
and guidelines recommend the same therapy for both sexes. While previous studies 
have identified gender differences in other chronic disease management, few 
studies have examined how implementation of COPD guidelines differs between men 
and women. We performed a cross-sectional study of veterans admitted to Veterans 
Affairs (VA) hospitals for COPD during October 1, 2008, to September 30, 2011. 
We collected information on baseline COPD medications during the 6 months prior 
to hospitalization and categorized therapies as "appropriate" or "inappropriate" 
based on current guidelines. We used multivariable logistic regression to 
examine the differences in COPD medications between men and women, after 
controlling for baseline patient characteristics. We also examined the 
differences in hospital outcomes, including length of stay and hospital 
readmission. We identified 33,558 veterans, including 1149 women and 32,409 men 
who were admitted to 130 VA hospitals. Women were significantly less likely to 
have received inhaler therapies prior to admission, with lower rates of 
short-acting beta agonists, short-acting muscarinic antagonists, long-acting 
beta agonists, and long acting muscarinic antagonists compared to men. Women 
also received fewer appropriate inhaler combinations (odds ratio [OR] = 0.83, 
95% confidence interval [CI] 0.74-0.93) and more inappropriate combinations (OR 
= 1.33, 95% CI 1.17-1.51). Women and men were prescribed similar rates of 
inhaled steroid and oral steroids. Hospital outcomes were also similar between 
the two groups. These findings highlight a potential gender disparity in 
appropriate outpatient COPD therapy. Improving the quality of care for patients 
with COPD should include equitable implementation of guideline-based COPD 
management.

DOI: 10.1177/1479972317702141
PMCID: PMC5729732
PMID: 28618875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


277. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Nov 1;192(9):1068-79. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201505-1048OC.

FLIGHT1 and FLIGHT2: Efficacy and Safety of QVA149 (Indacaterol/Glycopyrrolate) 
versus Its Monocomponents and Placebo in Patients with Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease.

Mahler DA(1)(2), Kerwin E(3), Ayers T(4), FowlerTaylor A(4), Maitra S(5), Thach 
C(4), Lloyd M(4), Patalano F(6), Banerji D(4).

Author information:
(1)1 Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire.
(2)2 Valley Regional Hospital, Claremont, New Hampshire.
(3)3 Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, Oregon.
(4)4 Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, New Jersey.
(5)5 Novartis Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad, India; and.
(6)6 Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Nov 1;192(9):1028-30.

RATIONALE: Current Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
strategy recommends the combination of two long-acting bronchodilators of 
different pharmacologic classes for the management of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) if symptoms are not adequately controlled by a single 
bronchodilator.
OBJECTIVES: The FLIGHT1 and FLIGHT2 studies evaluated the efficacy and safety of 
QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrrolate), a fixed-dose combination of a long-acting 
beta-agonist (indacaterol) and a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(glycopyrrolate), compared with its monocomponents and placebo in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: FLIGHT1 and FLIGHT2 were 12-week, identical, multicenter, randomized, 
double-blind, parallel-group, placebo- and active-controlled studies. Patients 
were randomized (1:1:1:1) to indacaterol/glycopyrrolate (27.5/15.6 μg twice 
daily), indacaterol (27.5 μg twice daily), glycopyrrolate (15.6 μg twice daily), 
or placebo, all delivered via the Neohaler device. The primary objective was to 
demonstrate the superiority of indacaterol/glycopyrrolate versus its 
monocomponents for standardized area under the curve from 0-12 hours for FEV1 at 
Week 12. Secondary objectives included St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
total score and transition dyspnea index total score and reduction in daily 
rescue medication use with indacaterol/glycopyrrolate versus placebo.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In total, 2,038 patients were included in the 
pooled analysis. Indacaterol/glycopyrrolate was statistically superior in terms 
of FEV1 area under the curve from 0-12 hours compared with its monocomponents (P 
< 0.001). Statistically and clinically meaningful improvements in St. George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire total score, transition dyspnea index total score, and 
reduction in rescue medication use were observed with indacaterol/glycopyrrolate 
compared with placebo (P < 0.001). The safety profile was comparable across the 
treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol/glycopyrrolate twice daily can be an alternative 
treatment option for the management of symptomatic patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD. Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov 
(NCT 01727141 and NCT 0171251).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201505-1048OC
PMID: 26177074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Dec 18;14:51-63. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S181224. eCollection 2019.

COPD treatment pathways in France: a retrospective analysis of electronic 
medical record data from general practitioners.

Meeraus W(1), Wood R(2), Jakubanis R(2), Holbrook T(2), Bizouard G(3), Despres 
J(3), Silva CCD(4), Nachbaur G(4), Landis SH(1), Punekar Y(5), Aguilaniu B(6), 
Ismaila AS(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park West, Uxbridge, UK.
(2)Adelphi Real World, Bollington, Cheshire, UK.
(3)IQVIA, Paris, France.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, Rueil-Malmaison, France.
(5)ViiV Healthcare, Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, University Grenoble-Alpes, Grenoble, France.
(7)GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA, USA, afisi.s.ismaila@gsk.com.
(8)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, afisi.s.ismaila@gsk.com.

BACKGROUND: Increasing availability of therapeutic options for COPD may drive 
new treatment pathways. This study describes COPD treatment in France, focusing 
on identifying initial treatment modifications in patients with COPD who either 
initiated long-acting bronchodilator (LABD)-based therapy or escalated to triple 
therapy (long acting muscarinic antagonist [LAMA] + long-acting beta-agonist 
[LABA] + inhaled corticosteroid [ICS]).
METHODS: This retrospective analysis of patients with COPD in a large general 
practitioner database (IQVIA Longitudinal Patient Database) in France included 
two cohorts: Cohort 1 - new initiators of LABD-based therapy (LAMA, LABA, LAMA + 
LABA, LAMA + ICS, LABA + ICS or LAMA + LABA + ICS); Cohort 2 - patients 
escalating to triple therapy from mono- or dual-bronchodilator-based maintenance 
treatment. Both cohorts were indexed on the date of initiation/escalation 
(January 2008-December 2013), and the first treatment modification (at class 
level) within the 18-month post-index observational period was described. Five 
mutually exclusive outcomes were defined: continuous use (no modification), 
discontinuation (permanent [≥91 days with no restart] or temporary [≥91 days 
with subsequent restart]), switch, and augmentation (Cohort 1 only). Exploratory 
analysis of Cohort 1 explored potential drivers of treatment initiation.
RESULTS: Overall, 5,065 patients initiated LABD-based therapy (Cohort 1), and 
501 escalated to triple therapy (Cohort 2). In Cohort 1, 7.0% of patients were 
continuous users, 46.5% discontinued permanently, 28.5% discontinued 
temporarily, 2.8% augmented (added LAMA and/or LABA and/or ICS), and 15.2% 
switched therapy. In Cohort 2, 18.2% of patients were continuous users, 7.2% 
discontinued permanently, 27.9% discontinued temporarily, and 46.7% switched 
therapy. Exploratory analyses showed that time since COPD diagnosis was first 
recorded, pre-index exacerbation events, and concomitant medical conditions were 
potential drivers of initial maintenance treatment choices.
CONCLUSION: Discontinuation among new initiators of LABD-based therapy was high 
in France, whereas few switched or augmented treatment. In comparison, permanent 
discontinuation within 18 months was low in patients escalating to triple 
therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S181224
PMCID: PMC6305135
PMID: 30587961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure WM, CCDS, GN, YP, SHL, and ASI are 
employees of GSK and own stocks/shares. ASI is also an unpaid faculty member at 
McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada. RW, RJ, and TH are employees of 
Adelphi Real World, and GB and JD are employees of IQVIA who were contracted by 
GSK to conduct the study. BA has received consultant fees and/or research funds 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Chiesi, Astra Zeneca, Pierre Fabre, and Roche. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


279. Respiration. 2018;96(4):370-381. doi: 10.1159/000491673. Epub 2018 Sep 18.

LABA/LAMA Fixed Dose Combination in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: The 
Impact on Health-Related Quality of Life.

Labor M(1), Braido F(2), Bikov A(3), Lahousse L(4), Rogliani P(5), Baiardini 
I(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, University Hospital Center Osijek, Osijek, 
Croatia, Faculty of Medicine, J.J. Strossmayer University of Osijek, Osijek, 
Croatia.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Respiratory Diseases and Allergy Clinic, 
University of Genova, Azienda Policlinico IRCCs San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
(3)NIHR Manchester Clinical Research Facility, Manchester University NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Bioanalysis, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Chirurgia Università di Roma "Tor 
Vergata,", Roma, Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: While fixed dose combinations (FDCs) of long-acting beta 2-agonists 
(LABAs) and long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) are increasingly tested 
on their efficacy in improving lung function, their effectiveness on Patient 
Reported Outcomes (PROs) such as Health Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) and 
Health Status (HS) deserve more attention.
OBJECTIVES: To review current available evidence about the treatment effect of 
fixed LABA/LAMA FDCs on HRQoL.
METHODS: A systematic literature search for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 
about the impact of LABA/LAMA FDCs versus placebo, LABA or LAMA or LABA/ICS on 
HRQoL in Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients has been 
performed.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight RCTs (n = 32, 165 COPD patients) investigating the impact 
of fixed LABA/LAMA combinations on HRQoL were included. Using the St George' s 
Respiratory Questionnaire, 27 out of 28 trials assessed HRQoL. LABA/LAMA FDCs 
significantly improved HRQoL versus placebo in 9 out of 11 trials, while change 
when compared to other LABA or LAMA monocomponents was significantly better in 
11 out 24. In 5 out of 6 RCTs having LABA/ICS as comparators, LABA/LAMA FDC had 
a similar effect and only 1 showed significant improvement in HRQL compared to 
LABA/ICS FDC.
CONCLUSION: LABA/LAMA FDCs may be helpful in improving HRQoL, but because of the 
heterogeneity of performed trials, strong conclusions cannot be drawn. Moreover, 
due to the different molecule properties, treatment schedule, and device 
characteristics of each FDC, a generalized judgment seems inappropriate. 
Pragmatic trials powered to detect real-life differences in HRQoL and 
head-to-head comparison are needed to guide clinical practice in terms of PROs.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000491673
PMID: 30227433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Oct 31;11:2701-2710. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S108758. eCollection 2016.

Efficacy and safety of tiotropium + olodaterol maintenance treatment in patients 
with COPD in the TONADO(®) and OTEMTO(®) studies: a subgroup analysis by age.

Ferguson GT(1), Karpel JP(2), Clerisme-Beaty E(3), Grönke L(4), Voß F(4), Buhl 
R(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI.
(2)North Shore Medical Arts LLP, Great Neck, NY.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc., Ridgefield, CT, USA.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim am Rhein.
(5)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Increasing age is associated with poor prognosis in patients with 
COPD.
OBJECTIVE: This analysis from the replicate Phase III OTEMTO® and TONADO® 
studies examined the efficacy and safety of tiotropium, a long-acting 
anticholinergic, combined with olodaterol, a long-acting beta-agonist, compared to 
monotherapies and placebo in patients with COPD aged 40 years to <65 years, 65 
years to <75 years, 75 years to <85 years, and ≥85 years.
METHODS: In these double-blind, parallel-group, active-controlled, multicenter, 
randomized studies, patients received tiotropium + olodaterol 2.5/5 μg or 5/5 
μg, tiotropium 5 μg or 2.5 μg (TONADO only), olodaterol 5 μg (TONADO only), or 
placebo (OTEMTO only). This analysis used the approved doses of tiotropium + 
olodaterol 5/5 μg, tiotropium 5 μg, and olodaterol 5 μg. Primary end points at 
12 weeks (OTEMTO) or 24 weeks (TONADO) included St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score, forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 
area under the curve from 0 hour to 3 hours (AUC0-3) response, and trough FEV1 
response.
RESULTS: A total of 1,621 patients were randomized (40 years to <65 years, 
n=749; 65 years to <75 years, n=674; 75 years to <85 years, n=186; ≥85 years, 
n=12) in OTEMTO and 5,162 patients (40 years to <65 years, n=2,654; 65 years to 
<75 years, n=1,967; 75 to <85 years, n=528; ≥85 years, n=13) in TONADO. FEV1 
AUC0-3 and trough FEV1 responses improved with tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 μg at 
12 weeks and 24 weeks compared to monotherapies or placebo for all age groups. 
SGRQ scores generally improved with tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 μg after 12 
weeks in OTEMTO and improved after 24 weeks in all age groups in TONADO. In all 
age groups receiving tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 μg compared to monotherapies or 
placebo, transition dyspnea index scores generally improved, while rescue 
medication usage improved.
CONCLUSION: No differences were noted in relative responses to treatment or 
safety when using tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 μg compared to monotherapies or 
placebo across all age groups.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S108758
PMCID: PMC5098524
PMID: 27843306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: GTF has received consulting and advisory board 
fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Pearl Therapeutics, Novartis, 
Forest, Sunovion, and Verona, consulting fees from Receptos, speaker fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Pearl Therapeutics, Forest, 
and Sunovion, and is in receipt of research grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
AstraZeneca, Pearl Therapeutics, Sunovion, Novartis, Theravance, Sanofi, Forest, 
and GlaxoSmithKline. JPK discloses no conflicts of interest. ECB, LG, and FV are 
employees of Boehringer Ingelheim. RB reports grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Roche, and the German Research Foundation. RB also reports 
consulting, Speaker Bureau, and advisory committee fees from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Novartis, Roche, and 
Takeda. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


281. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2018 Jun;17(6):589-596. doi: 
10.1080/14740338.2018.1472232. Epub 2018 May 14.

The safety of dual bronchodilation on cardiovascular serious adverse events in 
COPD.

Rogliani P(1)(2), Ora J(2), Matera MG(3), Cazzola M(1), Calzetta L(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery , University of Rome Tor 
Vergata , Rome , Italy.
(2)b Division of Respiratory Medicine , University Hospital Tor Vergata , Rome , 
Italy.
(3)c Department of Experimental Medicine , University of Campania Luigi 
Vanvitelli , Naples , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Long-acting beta-adrenoceptor (beta-AR) agonists (LABAs) plus 
long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) is the cornerstone for treating 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). LABA/LAMA combinations elicit 
clinical and functional synergistic interaction, and such an interaction should 
permit to reduce the dose of each monocomponent in the drug mixture to minimize 
the risk of adverse events (AEs). Overall, currently available LABA/LAMA 
fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) combine the drugs at the same doses of 
formulations designed for a single drug. Therefore, concerns regarding the 
possible risk of cardiovascular AEs have been raised related to the use of 
LABA/LAMA FDCs in COPD patients.
AREAS COVERED: LABAs and LAMAs have a high potential to induce cardiovascular 
AEs by stimulating the beta-AR receptors and inhibiting the muscarinic M2 
receptors expressed in the heart. This review will explore the data published on 
the cardiovascular safety of dual bronchodilation therapy in COPD patients.
EXPERT OPINION: LABA/LAMA FDCs are characterized by an acceptable cardiovascular 
safety profile, at least in the COPD population enrolled in randomized clinical 
trials. Nevertheless, large real life studies suggest that dual bronchodilation 
therapy may increase the risk of cardiovascular AEs. Post-marketing surveillance 
and observational studies are needed to adequately define the real 
cardiovascular safety profile of LABA/LAMA FDCs.

DOI: 10.1080/14740338.2018.1472232
PMID: 29716427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 2;10:1753-67. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S81053. eCollection 2015.

Efficacy and safety of once-daily inhaled umeclidinium/vilanterol in Asian 
patients with COPD: results from a randomized, placebo-controlled study.

Zheng J(1), Zhong N(1), Newlands A(2), Church A(3), Goh AH(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Centre of 
Respiratory Disease, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline, London, UK.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Combination of the inhaled long acting muscarinic antagonist 
umeclidinium (UMEC; GSK573719) with the long-acting beta-agonist vilanterol (VI) 
is an approved maintenance treatment for COPD in the US and EU. We compared the 
efficacy and safety of UMEC/VI with placebo in patients with COPD of Asian 
ancestry.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this 24-week, Phase III, multicenter, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study, patients were randomized 
1:1:1 to UMEC/VI 125/25 μg, UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg, or placebo. The primary efficacy 
end point was trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) on day 169; 
secondary end points were Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) focal score at week 24 
and weighted mean (WM) FEV1 over 0-6 hours postdose on day 1. Additional end 
points and safety were also assessed.
RESULTS: Both UMEC/VI 125/25 μg and UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg statistically 
significantly improved trough FEV1 at day 169 versus placebo (UMEC/VI 125/25 μg, 
0.216 L, [95% confidence interval [CI] 0.175-0.257]; UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg, 0.151 
L, 95% CI 0.110-0.191; both P<0.001). Statistically significant improvements in 
TDI score were observed for both UMEC/VI groups versus placebo (UMEC/VI 125/25 
μg, 0.9, 95% CI 0.3-1.4, P=0.002; UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg, 0.7, 95% CI 0.1-1.2, 
P=0.016). On day 1, both UMEC/VI groups improved 0-6-hour WM FEV1 versus placebo 
(UMEC/VI 125/25 μg, 0.182 L 95% CI 0.161-0.203; UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg, 0.160 L, 95% 
CI 0.139-0.181; both P<0.001). Statistically significant improvements for 
UMEC/VI groups versus placebo were observed for rescue albuterol use at weeks 
1-24 (puffs/day, both P<0.001). The incidence of adverse events was similar 
across groups.
CONCLUSION: In Asian patients with COPD, once-daily UMEC/VI 125/25 μg and UMEC 
62.5/25 μg resulted in clinically meaningful and statistically significant 
improvements in lung-function end points versus placebo. Symptomatic and quality 
of life measures also improved. The safety profile of UMEC/VI was consistent 
with previous studies.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S81053
PMCID: PMC4562726
PMID: 26366068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;16(17):2653-9. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.2015.1100171. Epub 2015 Dec 5.

Once-daily glycopyrronium bromide (Seebri Breezhaler(®)) for the treatment of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Ulrik CS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pulmonary Medicine , Hvidovre Hospital , DK-2650 Hvidovre , 
Denmark.
(2)b Institute of Clinical Medicine , University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen , 
Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: Long-acting bronchodilators are the mainstay of pharmacological 
therapy for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The 
choice of optimal bronchodilator therapy for COPD is increasingly difficult for 
clinicians as new treatments are marketed.
AREAS COVERED: Inhaled glycopyrronium bromide (Seebri Breezhaler®) is a 
well-tolerated long-acting anti-muscarinic agent (LAMA) with a fast onset of 
action. In patients with moderate to severe COPD, glycopyrronium bromide has 
clinically important effects on level of FEV1, use of relief medication, 
day-time dyspnea scores, and probably also on health status. Furthermore, 
glycopyrronium bromide also has beneficial effects on dynamic hyperinflation 
and, probably by that, exercise tolerance. Glycopyrronium bromide has been shown 
to reduce the rate of exacerbations in patients with moderate to severe COPD, 
although as a secondary outcome only.
EXPERT OPINION: Once-daily inhaled glycopyrronium bromide has positive impact on 
important COPD outcomes, comparable to the effects of other marketed LAMAs. 
Once-daily administration may improve adherence, and glycopyrronium bromide has 
the potential for a role in the future management of COPD similar to that of 
other long-acting anti-muscarinic agents, including tiotropium. Studies of 
glycopyrronium bromide with exacerbation rate as the primary outcome of interest 
is needed.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1100171
PMID: 26641535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2019 Jul;75(7):1025-1032. doi: 10.1007/s00228-019-02667-4. 
Epub 2019 Mar 22.

Discontinuation of therapy among COPD patients who experience an improvement in 
exacerbation status.

Reilev M(1)(2), Kristensen KB(3), Søndergaard J(4), Henriksen DP(5), Thompson 
W(4), Pottegård A(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Department of Public Health, University 
of Southern Denmark, Odense C, Denmark. mreilev@health.sdu.dk.
(2)Research Unit of General Practice, Department of Public Health, University of 
Southern Denmark, JB Winsløwsvej 19, 2, 5000, Odense C, Denmark. 
mreilev@health.sdu.dk.
(3)Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Department of Public Health, University 
of Southern Denmark, Odense C, Denmark.
(4)Research Unit of General Practice, Department of Public Health, University of 
Southern Denmark, JB Winsløwsvej 19, 2, 5000, Odense C, Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Biochemistry & Pharmacology, Odense University 
Hospital, Odense C, Denmark.

PURPOSE: A subset of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
experience a decrease in exacerbation frequency, leading to a diminished need 
for treatment with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). We investigated prescribing 
and discontinuation patterns of long-acting bronchodilators and ICS in COPD 
patients according to exacerbation frequency.
METHODS: Using the nationwide Danish health registries, we conducted a drug 
utilization study among patients who had at least two exacerbations or one 
hospitalization due to an exacerbation during 2011-2012. This study population 
was stratified according to consistency of exacerbation occurrence after 12, 24, 
36, and 48 months of follow-up and the groups were described according to use of 
ICS, long-acting beta-agonists (LABA), and long acting beta agonistss (LAMA), 
and combinations thereof.
RESULTS: We identified 29,010 COPD exacerbators during 2011-2012. Upon 
inclusion, 70% received ICS-containing regimens, in combination with LABA (23%) 
or both LABA and LAMA (41%). The proportion of prevalent users of ICS-containing 
regimens decreased to 56% during follow-up among exacerbation-free individuals, 
while it increased to 86% in individuals who experienced at least one 
exacerbation annually. Persistence to ICS-containing regimens was 58% after 
4 years in individuals without exacerbations compared to 74% among those with 
annual exacerbations. Similar patterns were observed for triple therapy which 
was the most extensively used drug combination regardless of consistency of 
exacerbation occurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: The extensive use of ICS and the relatively high persistence to 
ICS-containing regimens in individuals who had a decrease in exacerbation 
occurrence highlight a need for the development and implementation of 
de-escalation strategies in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-019-02667-4
PMID: 30903196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. COPD. 2015;12(5):582-90. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2014.995288. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Inhaled Corticosteroids for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease--The Shifting 
Treatment Paradigm.

Wilkie M(1), Finch S(1), Schembri S(1).

Author information:
(1)a Tayside Respiratory Research Group , Ninewells Hospital , Dundee , United 
Kingdom.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) guidelines suggest using inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with severe airflow limitation or those at 
high risk of exacerbations. This recommendation is based on evidence 
demonstrating that ICS, especially when prescribed in fixed-dose combinations 
(FDC) with long-acting beta agonists (LABA), improve quality of life (QoL), 
decrease exacerbations and hospitalisations, and have been associated with a 
trend towards a reduction in all-cause mortality. Audit shows that routine 
prescribing practice frequently uses inhaler therapies outside current 
guidelines recommendations; severe to very severe disease constitutes about 20% 
of all COPD patients, but up to 75% of COPD patients are prescribed an ICS, with 
significant numbers given ICS/LABA as first-line maintenance therapy. The role 
of ICS in the treatment paradigm for COPD is changing, driven by the growing 
evidence of increased risk of pneumonia, and the introduction of a new class of 
FDC; LABA and long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA), which simplify dual 
bronchodilation and present a plausible alternative therapy. As the evidence 
base for dual therapy bronchodilation expands, it is likely that maximal 
bronchodilation will move up the treatment algorithm and ICS reserved for those 
with more severe disease who are not controlled on dual therapy. This change has 
already manifested in local COPD algorithms, such as those at Tayside, and 
represents a significant change in recommended prescribing practice. This review 
reassesses the role of ICS in the shifting treatment paradigm, in the context of 
alternative treatment options that provide maximal bronchodilation.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2014.995288
PMCID: PMC4776680
PMID: 25774769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 22;14:279-287. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S190086. eCollection 2019.

Changes in COPD inhaler prescriptions in the United Kingdom, 2000 to 2016.

Bloom CI(1), Elkin SL(2), Quint JK(1).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW3 6LR, 
UK, chloe.bloom06@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Imperial College NHS Trust, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Over the past two decades, there have been significant changes in 
the pharmacological management of COPD, due to an explosion of inhaler trials, 
and timely updation of national and international guidelines. We sought to 
describe temporal changes in prescribing practices in the United Kingdom, and 
some of the factors that may have influenced them.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: COPD patients were identified from UK primary care 
nationally representative electronic healthcare records (Clinical Practice 
Research Datalink), between 2000 and 2016. Prescription data were described by 
the three maintenance inhaled medication classes used, inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS), long-acting beta agonist (LABA), long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA), and their combinations, dual LABA-ICS, dual LAMA-LABA, or triple therapy 
LABA-ICS-LAMA. Differing patient characteristics across the six different 
therapy regimens were measured in 2016.
RESULTS: COPD patients were identified: 187,588 prevalent and incident inhaler 
users and 169,511 incident inhaler users. Since 2002, LAMA showed increasing 
popularity, while ICS alone exhibited an inverse trend. Triple therapy 
prescriptions rapidly increased as the first-line therapy until 2014 when 
LAMA-LABA prescriptions started to increase. By 2014, 41% of all COPD patients 
were maintained on triple therapy, and 13% were maintained on LAMA only. 
Characterizing the patients in 2016 revealed that those on triple therapy were 
more likely to have more severe disease, yet, over a third of patients on triple 
therapy had only mild disease.
CONCLUSION: UK prescribing practices were not in keeping with national 
guidelines but did appear to align with evidence from major drug trials and 
updated international guidelines. There has been a huge upsurge in triple 
therapy but incident data show this trend is beginning to reverse for initial 
management.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S190086
PMCID: PMC6349076
PMID: 30774325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr Bloom has no conflict of interest. 
Dr Elkin has received speaker fees from AZ, Chiesi, and Pfizer in the last 3 
years. Dr Quint, outside the submitted work, reports grants from The Health 
Foundation, MRC, British Lung Foundation, grants and personal fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Insmed, and Bayer, personal 
fees from Chiesi and Teva, and grants from IQVIA. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


287. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2018 Oct;19(14):1603-1611. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2018.1518431. Epub 2018 Oct 12.

Olodaterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a 
narrative review.

Melani AS(1).

Author information:
(1)a Fisiopatologia e Riabilitazione Respiratoria, Dipartimento Vasi, Cuore e 
Torace, Policlinico Le Scotte , Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese , Siena 
, Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators are the key-stone of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) management. Olodaterol 5 µg, a long-acting beta-adrenoceptor 
agonist (LABA) is one such bronchodilator indicated as a once-daily maintenance 
therapy. Areas covered: This article reviews the several trials that have 
assessed olodaterol as a COPD therapy. It covers safety and tolerability data 
and provides the reader with an expert opinion on its use as a treatment for 
COPD. Expert opinion: Olodaterol improves lung function for 24 h and reduces 
rescue medication use. It may also improve dyspnea, exercise tolerance, and 
health-related quality of life. It is well tolerated with an acceptable 
cardiovascular and respiratory adverse event profile. There is some evidence 
that olodaterol, as well as other LABAs, can reduce exacerbation frequency, but 
not FEV1 decline and death. LABAs alone are indicated in group A/B COPD 
subjects. Olodaterol and indacaterol are administered once-daily and may offer 
an adherence advantage over other LABAs with more frequent dosing schedules. 
Co-administration of an olodaterol/tiotropium fixed dose combination in a single 
inhaler device is recommended as step-up in group A/B COPD subjects not 
sufficiently treated by olodaterol alone or as initial therapy in those with 
severe exertional dyspnea.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2018.1518431
PMID: 30311516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Jun 8;11:1233-43. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S100445. eCollection 2016.

Efficacy and safety of twice-daily glycopyrrolate in patients with stable, 
symptomatic COPD with moderate-to-severe airflow limitation: the GEM1 study.

LaForce C(1), Feldman G(2), Spangenthal S(3), Eckert JH(4), Henley M(5), 
Patalano F(4), D'Andrea P(5).

Author information:
(1)North Carolina Clinical Research, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(2)South Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Spartanburg, SC, USA.
(3)American Health Research, Charlotte, NC, USA.
(4)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to confirm the efficacy and safety of 
twice-daily glycopyrrolate 15.6 µg, a long acting muscarinic antagonist, in 
patients with stable, symptomatic, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
with moderate-to-severe airflow limitation.
METHODS: The GEM1 study was a 12-week, multicenter, double-blind, 
parallel-group, placebo-controlled study that randomized patients with stable, 
symptomatic COPD with moderate-to-severe airflow limitation to twice-daily 
glycopyrrolate 15.6 µg or placebo (1:1) via the Neohaler(®) device. The primary 
objective was to demonstrate superiority of glycopyrrolate versus placebo in 
terms of forced expiratory volume in 1 second area under the curve between 0 and 
12 hours post morning dose at week 12. Other outcomes included additional 
spirometric end points, transition dyspnea index, St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire, COPD Assessment Test, rescue medication use, and symptoms 
reported by patients via electronic diary. Safety was also assessed during the 
study.
RESULTS: Of the 441 patients randomized (glycopyrrolate, n=222; placebo, n=219), 
96% of patients completed the planned treatment phase. Glycopyrrolate 
demonstrated statistically significant (P<0.001) improvements in lung function 
versus placebo. Glycopyrrolate showed statistically significant improvement in 
the transition dyspnea index focal score, St George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
total score, COPD Assessment Test score, rescue medication use, and daily total 
symptom score versus placebo at week 12. Safety was comparable between the 
treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: Significant improvement in lung function, dyspnea, COPD symptoms, 
health status, and rescue medication use suggests that glycopyrrolate is a safe 
and effective treatment option as maintenance bronchodilator in patients with 
stable, symptomatic COPD with moderate-to-severe airflow limitation.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S100445
PMCID: PMC4907493
PMID: 27354782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Assoc Physicians India. 2017 Sep;65(9):100-104.

Role of Clarithromycin in Acute Exacerbations of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease.

Vora A(1).

Author information:
(1)Senior Consulting Pulmonologist, Advanced Multi - Specialty Hospital, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra.

The prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is increasing in 
under-developing and developing countries. As per current estimations, COPD will 
become the third leading cause of death globally, by 2030. Long-acting 
anti-cholinergic agents, beta-agonists, inhaled corticosteroids, antibiotics and 
mucolytics are few of the agents currently used in the treatment of COPD, which 
improve the symptoms and overall quality of life. Several of the important 
classes of antibiotics are used in the management of COPD including penicillins, 
cephalosporins, tetracyclines, fluoroquinolones, sulphonamides, aminoglycosides 
and macrolides. Macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin, clarithromycin and 
azithromycin have a variety of physiological activities other than their 
antimicrobial effects, ultimately helping in preventing exacerbations and 
reducing mortality rates. Clinical studies indicate that long term use of 
clarithromycin is effective in the treatment of COPD exacerbations with lower 
incidence of adverse effects. This descriptive review on the role of the 
clarithromycin in treatment of COPD exacerbations will highlight these 
properties of clarithromycin in detail.

© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2011.

PMID: 29313589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 May 23;12:1527-1537. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S133793. eCollection 2017.

A cross-sectional survey of current treatment and symptom burden of patients 
with COPD consulting for routine care according to GOLD 2014 classifications.

Ding B(1), Small M(2), Holmgren U(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Evidence and Observational Research, AstraZeneca Gothenburg, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(2)Real World Research (Respiratory), Adelphi Real World, Bollington, UK.
(3)Global Payer Evidence and Pricing, AstraZeneca Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: As part of the Respiratory Disease Specific Program (DSP) conducted 
to provide observations of clinical practice from a physician and matched 
patient viewpoint, this study aimed to establish how patients with COPD are 
treated according to the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) classification system and to quantify the symptom burden.
METHODS: Data were obtained from the Respiratory DSP, a cross-sectional survey 
of patients with a diagnosis of COPD consulting for routine care in France, 
Germany, Italy, Spain, the UK, and the USA during the third quarter of 2013. 
Patients' exacerbation risk and symptom data were used for classification into 
GOLD groups A-D based on GOLD 2014 criteria. Prescribing practices were 
stratified by physician type and time since patient diagnosis.
RESULTS: A total of 903 physicians participated in the Respiratory DSP, with 
data from 1,641 patients included in this analysis. Most patients were 
classified into GOLD groups B (n=742; 45.2%) and D (n=704; 42.9%). Patients in 
groups A and D were most likely to be treated in line with GOLD recommendations 
(61.5% and 77.5%, respectively), compared with 40.1% for group B. Patients with 
a diagnosis within the past 12 months were more likely to be treated according 
to recommendations. Inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) in combination with one or 
more long-acting bronchodilator were prescribed across all GOLD groups. Patterns 
of treatment were, in general, similar for patients treated by a primary care 
physician or a pulmonologist. COPD assessment test scores ≥10 indicating a high 
symptom burden were reported for >80% of patients.
CONCLUSION: This analysis confirmed a high symptom burden among patients with 
COPD and indicates some misalignment of prescribing with GOLD recommendations, 
particularly regarding the role of ICS/long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) and 
ICS/LABA + long acting muscarinic antagonist combinations across the different 
GOLD groups.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S133793
PMCID: PMC5447695
PMID: 28579771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Ulf Holmgren and Bo Ding are 
employees of AstraZeneca. Mark Small is an employee of Adelphi Real World. The 
authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


291. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2015 May;79(5):695-708. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12545.

New combination bronchodilators for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 
current evidence and future perspectives.

Singh D(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, University Hospital of 
South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, M23 9QZ, UK.

Fixed dose combination (FDC) dual bronchodilators that co-administer a long 
acting beta -adrenoceptor agonist (LABA) and a long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) are a new class of inhaled treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). This review focuses on the clinical evidence for the benefit of 
LABA/LAMA FDCs compared with monocomponent treatments, and also compared with 
active comparators that are widely used for the treatment of COPD, namely 
tiotropium and salmeterol-fluticasone. Novel FDC dual bronchodilators include 
QVA149 and umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI). Long term clinical trials show 
that QVA149 and UMEC/VI are superior to monocomponent therapy in terms of trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), although the FEV1 improvement was 
limited to approximately 80-90% of the added monocomponent values. This suggests 
that the effect of combining a LABA and a LAMA is not fully additive. LABA/LAMA 
FDC were associated with the largest mean changes in symptoms and health status 
that were above the minimal clinically important difference, in contrast to the 
monocomponents. Furthermore, these LABA/LAMA FDCs demonstrated superiority over 
the active comparators tiotropium and salmeterol-fluticasone in terms of trough 
FEV1 and patient-reported outcomes. LABA/LAMA FDCs offer a simplified means of 
maximizing bronchodilation for COPD patients, with the improvements in lung 
function being mirrored by benefits in terms of symptoms and exacerbations. The 
use of LABA/LAMA FDCs in clinical practice is set to grow and further studies 
are needed to define their optimal place in treatment guidelines.

© 2014 The Author. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12545
PMCID: PMC4415707
PMID: 25377687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jul 4;14:1441-1453. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S195852. eCollection 2019.

Assessment of physical functioning and handling of tiotropium/olodaterol 
Respimat(®) in patients with COPD in a real-world clinical setting.

Steinmetz KO(1), Abenhardt B(2), Pabst S(3), Hänsel M(4), Kondla A(5), Bayer 
V(6), Buhl R(7).

Author information:
(1)LungCenter Darmstadt , Darmstadt, Germany.
(2)Pulmonary Practice , Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Lung Center , Bonn-Duisdorf, Germany.
(4)TA Respiratory/Biosimilars, Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, 
Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG , Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(6)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc ., Ridgefield, CT, USA.
(7)Pulmonary Department, Johannes Gutenberg University Hospital Mainz, Mainz, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) show 
signs of reduced physical activity from the early stages of the disease, 
impacting morbidity and mortality. Data suggest treatment with tiotropium, a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist, and olodaterol, a long-acting ß2-agonist 
(LABA), as monotherapies and in combination, increases exercise capacity. This 
study assessed the effects of fixed-dose tiotropium/olodaterol (delivered via 
Respimat®) on physical function in Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease A-D patients requiring long-acting dual bronchodilation treatment 
in a real-world setting.
METHODS: This open-label, single arm, noninterventional study measured changes 
in physical function in COPD patients treated with tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg 
for approximately 6 weeks (between Visit 1 [baseline] and Visit 2). Primary end 
point was therapeutic success, defined as a minimum 10-point increase in 
Physical Functioning Questionnaire (PF-10) score. Secondary end points included 
change in PF-10 from Visit 1 to Visit 2, the patient's general condition 
(measured by Physician's Global Evaluation score) at Visit 1 and Visit 2, and 
patient satisfaction with treatment delivered via the Respimat® device (assessed 
by Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire) at study end.
RESULTS: Therapeutic success was observed in 51.5% of 1578 patients (95% 
confidence interval [CI] 49.0, 54.0) after approximately 6 weeks of treatment 
with tiotropium/olodaterol. Mean change in PF-10 score between Visit 1 and Visit 
2 was 11.6 points (95% CI 10.7, 12.6). Patient general condition improved as 
indicated by a general improvement in scores between visits. Most patients were 
very satisfied or satisfied with tiotropium/olodaterol treatment (82.5%), 
inhalation (87.5%), and handling of Respimat® (85.2%). One percent of patients 
reported an investigator-defined drug-related adverse events (AE).
CONCLUSION: Tiotropium/olodaterol treatment improved physical functioning in 
COPD patients. An associated increase in patient general condition was observed. 
Most patients were very satisfied or satisfied with tiotropium/olodaterol 
treatment, inhaling, and handling of the Respimat® device. No unexpected 
drug-related AE occurred.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S195852
PMCID: PMC6618035
PMID: 31308649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RB received grants and personal fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, and Roche. He also received 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Cipla and Teva, outside the submitted 
work. SP was an investigator in the submitted work. AK and VB are employees of 
Boehringer Ingelheim. MH was an employee of Boehringer Ingelheim at the time of 
the submitted work and is now an employee of CSL Behring GmbH. The authors 
report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


293. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2016 Oct;10(10):1045-55. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2016.1227247. Epub 2016 Sep 1.

Formoterol fumarate + glycopyrrolate for the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Radovanovic D(1), Mantero M(2), Sferrazza Papa GF(3), Valenti V(4), Aliberti 
S(2), Di Marco F(3), Santus P(1).

Author information:
(1)a Health Sciences Department, Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, Fondazione 
Salvatore Maugeri, Scientific Institute of Milan-IRCCS , Università degli Studi 
di Milano , Milan , Italy.
(2)b Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation , Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Cardio-thoracic Unit and Cystic Fibrosis Adult Center Fondazione 
IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Milano , Milan , Italy.
(3)c Health Sciences Department, Respiratory Unit, San Paolo and Carlo Hospital 
, Università degli Studi di Milano , Milan , Italy.
(4)d San Donato Milanese , Università degli Studi di Milano , Milan , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by a 
high disability and increasing mortality. Bronchodilators are the cornerstone of 
pharmacological treatment in COPD, while therapeutic optimization with an 
improvement in symptoms and compliance represent the actual goals. This has led 
to the development of devices that combine different classes of inhalatory 
drugs. Recently, a novel combination of the long acting antimuscarinic agent 
glycopyrronium bromide and the beta2-agonist formoterol fumarate has been 
developed in a metered dose inhaler delivery system.
AREAS COVERED: The present article will discuss the current unmet needs in 
pharmacological therapy of COPD, will then briefly cover the pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic characteristics of the formoterol/glycopyrronium fixed dose 
combination and present the novel delivery system based on engineered 
microparticles and the co-suspension technology. Finally, efficacy and safety 
results of phase I, II and III trials will be reviewed. Expert commentary: The 
novel combination therapy of formoterol/glycopyrronium is the first available as 
a metered dose inhaler and proved to have a good efficacy and safety profile 
compared to monocomponents and tiotropium. Although still limited, data from 
phase III trials provide good evidence to consider it a valid option in the 
pharmacological management of patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2016.1227247
PMID: 27552524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2018 Apr;130(7-8):247-258. doi: 10.1007/s00508-017-1307-7. 
Epub 2018 Jan 10.

Predictors of short-term LAMA ineffectiveness in treatment naïve patients with 
moderate to severe COPD.

Fijačko V(1)(2), Labor M(1)(2), Fijačko M(3), Škrinjarić-Cincar S(1)(2), Labor 
S(1)(2), Dumbović Dubravčić I(4), Bačun T(2)(5), Včev A(2)(5), Popović-Grle 
S(6)(7), Plavec D(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, University Hospital Center Osijek, Osijek, 
Croatia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, J.J. Strossmayer University of Osijek, Osijek, Croatia.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Diagnostics, University Hospital Center 
Osijek, Osijek, Croatia.
(4)Department of Allergy and Pulmonology, Children's Hospital Srebrnjak, Zagreb, 
Croatia.
(5)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Center Osijek, Osijek, Croatia.
(6)Department of Allergology, Clinical Center for Pulmonary Diseases Jordanovac, 
University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(7)School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(8)Faculty of Medicine, J.J. Strossmayer University of Osijek, Osijek, Croatia. 
plavec@bolnica-srebrnjak.hr.
(9)Research Department, Children's Hospital Srebrnjak, Srebrnjak 100, Zagreb, 
Croatia. plavec@bolnica-srebrnjak.hr.

BACKGROUND: No specific (only subgroup) recommendations for the use of 
long acting muscarinic antagonists in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) exist. The aim of this exploratory hypothesis generating study was to 
assess whether different phenotypic/endotypic characteristics could be 
determinants of the short-term ineffectiveness of the initial tiotropium bromide 
monotherapy in treatment naïve moderate to severe COPD patients.
METHODS: A total of 51 consecutively recruited COPD patients were followed for 
3 months after the initial evaluation and prescribed initial treatment 
(tiotropium). Short-term treatment ineffectiveness was assessed as a composite 
measure comprising COPD exacerbations, need for additional treatment, and no 
improvement in functional parameters, e.g. 6‑min walking test (6MWT), body-mass 
index, airflow obstruction, dyspnea, and exercise (BODE) index and forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), and as single components.
RESULTS: Treatment ineffectiveness was significantly associated with baseline 
hemoglobin level, COPD assessment test (CAT) score, modified Medical Research 
Council (mMRC) scale and BODE index (p = 0.002). Incident exacerbation during 
the follow-up was associated with baseline bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) 
alpha-amylase level and CAT score (p < 0.001), and change in treatment with 
leukocyte count, 6MWT desaturation and fatigue (p < 0.001). No improvement in 
6MWT was associated with baseline CAT score, body mass index, mMRC, fatigue, 
6MWT and BODE index (p = 0.002). No improvement in BODE index was associated 
with leukocyte count, serum interleukin 8 (IL-8) and BALF albumin levels 
(p < 0.001); and no improvement in FEV1 with CAT score, baseline vital capacity 
and BALF tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) level (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that there is a possibility to identify 
predictors of short-term tiotropium ineffectiveness in patients with moderate to 
severe COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00508-017-1307-7
PMID: 29322375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Drugs R D. 2016 Jun;16(2):217-27. doi: 10.1007/s40268-016-0131-2.

Dual Bronchodilator Therapy with Umeclidinium/Vilanterol Versus Tiotropium plus 
Indacaterol in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Randomized Controlled 
Trial.

Kalberg C(1), O'Dell D(2), Galkin D(2), Newlands A(3), Fahy WA(3).

Author information:
(1)GSK, PO Box 13398, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709-3398, USA. 
chris.j.kalberg@gsk.com.
(2)GSK, PO Box 13398, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709-3398, USA.
(3)Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, GSK, Stockley Park, Middlesex, UK.

INTRODUCTION: The fixed-dose, long-acting bronchodilator combination of 
umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI) has not previously been compared with a 
combination of a long acting muscarinic antagonist and long-acting beta-agonist in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: This 12-week, randomized, blinded, triple-dummy, parallel-group, 
non-inferiority study compared once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25 mcg with once-daily 
tiotropium (TIO) 18 mcg + indacaterol (IND) 150 mcg in patients with 
moderate-to-very-severe COPD. The primary endpoint was the trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) on day 85 (predefined non-inferiority margin 
-50 mL), and the secondary endpoint was the 0- to 6-h weighted mean (WM) FEV1 on 
day 84. Other efficacy endpoints [including rescue medication use, the 
Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) focal score, and the St. George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ) score] and safety endpoints [adverse events (AEs), vital 
signs, and COPD exacerbations] were also assessed.
RESULTS: Trough FEV1 improvements were comparable between treatment groups 
[least squares (LS) mean changes from baseline to day 85: UMEC/VI 172 mL; 
TIO + IND 171 mL; treatment difference 1 mL; 95 % confidence interval (CI) -29 
to 30 mL], demonstrating non-inferiority between UMEC/VI and TIO + IND. The 
treatments produced similar improvements in the trough FEV1 at other study 
visits and the 0- to 6-h WM FEV1 (LS mean changes at day 84: UMEC/VI 235 mL; 
TIO + IND 258 mL; treatment difference -23 mL; 95 % CI -54 to 8 mL). The results 
for patient-reported measures (rescue medication use, TDI focal score, and SGRQ 
score) were comparable; both treatments produced clinically meaningful 
improvements in TDI and SGRQ scores. The incidence of AEs and COPD 
exacerbations, and changes in vital signs were similar for the two treatments.
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI and TIO + IND, given once daily, provided similar 
improvements in lung function and patient-reported outcomes over 12 weeks in 
patients with COPD, with comparable tolerability and safety profiles.
TRIAL NUMBERS: ClinicalTrials.gov study ID NCT02257385; GSK study no. 116961.

DOI: 10.1007/s40268-016-0131-2
PMCID: PMC4875926
PMID: 27028749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Nov 3;10:2365-76. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S93191. eCollection 2015.

The efficacy and safety of triple inhaled treatment in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis using 
Bayesian methods.

Kwak MS(1), Kim E(2), Jang EJ(3), Kim HJ(4), Lee CH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Healthcare Research Institute, Healthcare 
System Gangnam Center, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Statistics, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Department of Information Statistics, Andong National University, Andong, 
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Preventive Medicine, College of Medicine, Korea University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul National 
University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: Although tiotropium (TIO) and inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting 
β-agonists are frequently prescribed together, the efficacy of "triple therapy" 
has not been scientifically demonstrated. We conducted a systematic review and 
meta-analysis using Bayesian methods to compare triple therapy and TIO 
monotherapy.
METHODS: We searched the MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane Library databases for 
randomized controlled trials comparing the efficacy and safety of triple therapy 
and TIO monotherapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). We conducted a meta-analysis to compare the effectiveness and safety of 
triple therapy and TIO monotherapy using Bayesian random effects models.
RESULTS: Seven trials were included, and the risk of bias in the majority of the 
studies was acceptable. There were no statistically significant differences in 
the incidence of death and acute exacerbation of disease in the triple therapy 
and TIO monotherapy groups. Triple therapy improved the prebronchodilator forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (mean difference [MD], 63.68 mL; 95% credible 
interval [CrI], 45.29-82.73), and patients receiving triple therapy showed more 
improvement in St George Respiratory Questionnaire scores (MD, -3.11 points; 95% 
CrI, -6.00 to -0.80) than patients receiving TIO monotherapy. However, both of 
these differences were lower than the minimal clinically important difference 
(MCID). No excessive adverse effects were reported in triple therapy group.
CONCLUSION: Triple therapy with TIO and ICSs/long-acting β-agonists was only 
slightly more efficacious than TIO monotherapy in treating patients with COPD. 
Further investigations into the efficacy of new inhaled drugs are needed.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S93191
PMCID: PMC4639518
PMID: 26604734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Pneumologie. 2018 Dec;72(12):832-842. doi: 10.1055/a-0651-6407. Epub 2018 Aug 
28.

[Inhaled Triple Therapy in Severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Gillissen A(1), Paparoupa M(2), Frings D(2), Atique B(3), Koczulla R(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Med. Klinik III (Innere Medizin/Pneumologie), Kreiskliniken 
Reutlingen/Ermstalklinik, Reutlingen-Bad Urach.
(2)Klinik für Intensivmedizin, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg.
(3)Innere Medizin II (Onkologie, Hämatologie, Klinische Immunologie, 
Rheumatologie und Pulmologie), Medizinische Universitätsklinik Tübingen, 
Tübingen.
(4)Fachzentrum für Pneumologie, Allergologie und Schlafmedizin, Schön Klinik 
Berchtesgadener Land, Schönau am Königssee, Lehrkrankenhaus der Philipps 
Universität Marburg.
(5)Lehrstuhl für pneumologische Rehabilitation, Klinik für Pneumologie der 
Philipps Universität Marburg, Marburg.

COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) is characterised by persistent 
airflow obstruction caused by exposure to irritants including cigarette smoke 
dust, and fumes. Long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) and long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) in fixed-dose combination inhalers are the pillars of modern 
COPD therapy. LABA/inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) inhalers have been proved to be 
particularly efficient in patients with ≥ 2 exacerbations per year. Until 
recently, although recommended in guidelines for severe and unstable COPD 
patients, the clinical usefulness of the LABA/LAMA/ICS combination was a matter 
of debate. Recent trials with fixed-dose combination inhalers containing 
fluticasonfuroate/vilanterol/umeclidinium or 
beclometasone/formoterol/glycopyrronium significantly reduced exacerbation rates 
and dyspnea scores and improved lung function as well as quality of life better 
than the LABA/ICS, LABA/LAMA comparators or the single compounds in selected 
COPD trial patients. Beclometasone/formoterol/glycolpyrronium and 
fluticasonfuroate/umeclidinium/vilanterol are the first triple combination 
therapies approved in a fixed-dose inhaler for COPD patients. The domains of 
triple fixed-dose formulations are COPD patients in groups C and D.

Publisher: COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) ist durch eine 
persistierende Atemwegsobstruktion charakterisiert, die durch eine meist 
jahrzehntelange Exposition gegenüber inhalativen Noxen wie Zigarettenrauch, 
Stäuben oder Gasen hervorgerufen wird. Langwirksame Beta-2-Mimetika und 
langwirksame Anticholinergika (LABA/LAMA), getrennt oder in einem 
Inhalationsdevice, sind gegenwärtig die wichtigste Grundlage in der 
COPD-Therapie. LABA/ICS- (inhalatives Kortikosteroid) Kombinationen haben ihren 
Stellenwert im Rahmen der Eskalation v. a. bei Patienten mit ≥ 2 
Exazerbationen/Jahr. Neuere Studien zu Dreifachfixkombinationen, die entweder 
Fluticason/Vilanterol/Umeclidinium oder Beclometason/Formoterol/Glycopyrronium 
enthalten, haben unser Wissen zur ICS-basierten Therapie der COPD erweitert. Die 
inhalativen Triple-Therapien reduzierten im Vergleich zu LABA/ICS, zur 
LAMA-Monotherapie und zur LABA/LAMA-Kombination signifikant sowohl die 
Exazerbationsrate, als auch die Dyspnoe und verbesserten die Lungenfunktion 
(FEV1) sowie die Lebensqualität. Ende 2017 wurde eine Kombination aus 
Beclometason/Formoterol/Glycopyrronium und Anfang 2018 eine Kombination aus 
Fluticasonfuroat/Umeclidinium/Vilanterol als fixe Triple-Präparate für die 
inhalative COPD-Therapie zugelassen. Die Domäne für die 
LABA/LAMA/ICS-Kombinationen ist die schwere COPD der Gruppen C + D.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0651-6407
PMID: 30153695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A. Gillissen: AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie 
Menarini, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Novartis, Santis B. Atique: 
Kostenübernahme von Kongressen und Fortbildungsveranstaltungen durch Actelion, 
Novartis, Roche und Boehringer Ingelheim.R. Koczulla: Grifols, CSL Behring, 
Novartis, Roche, Novotec, AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie Menarini, Teva, Chiesi, 
Mundipharma, Boehringer Ingelheim.M. Paparoupa und D. Frings geben an, dass kein 
Interessenkonflikt besteht.


298. Am J Manag Care. 2019 Apr;25(4):201-204.

Effect of changing COPD triple-therapy inhaler combinations on COPD symptoms.

Ladziak N(1), Albanese NP.

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona College of Pharmacy, 650 E Van Buren St, Office 3373, 
Phoenix, AZ 85004. Email: ladziak@pharmacy.arizona.edu.

OBJECTIVES: To determine if symptoms changed after changing chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) triple-therapy inhalers to a less expensive regimen.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective observational case-series analysis.
METHODS: A quality improvement program was instituted to reduce drug costs 
associated with COPD inhalers between fall 2016 and spring 2017. Patients 
identified as taking an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β agonist 
(LABA) inhaler and a long acting muscarinic agonist (LAMA) inhaler were changed 
to a LAMA/LABA inhaler and an ICS inhaler. Symptoms were assessed at baseline 
and subsequent follow-up using the COPD Assessment Test (CAT), with lower scores 
representing better symptom control. Then, a retrospective observational 
case-series analysis of 118 patient charts was completed. The primary outcome 
was mean difference in CAT score. Data were analyzed using a paired t test with 
an α value of 0.05.
RESULTS: Of 118 patients included in the quality improvement program, 19 met the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria. The mean (SD) CAT score prior to the change 
was 15.53 (5.36), and the mean (SD) CAT score after the change was 14.68 (6.98). 
Symptom scores improved after the change, with an average difference in 
postchange and prechange CAT scores of -0.84, although this difference was not 
statistically significant (95% CI, -3.57 to 1.89; P = .525).
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the results of this observational review, changing COPD 
triple-therapy inhalers did not result in a significant change in 
patient-reported symptom scores. Patients may use triple-therapy inhalers that 
are most affordable without a significant change in symptom control.

PMID: 30986017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 Feb;16(2):200-208. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201804-283OC.

Alignment of Inhaled Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Therapies with 
Published Strategies. Analysis of the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease Recommendations in SPIROMICS.

Ghosh S(1), Anderson WH(2), Putcha N(3), Han MK(4), Curtis JL(4), Criner GJ(5), 
Dransfield MT(6), Barr RG(7), Krishnan JA(8), Lazarus SC(9), Cooper CB(10), 
Paine R 3rd(11), Peters SP(12), Hansel NN(3), Martinez FJ(13), Drummond MB(1); 
Current and former investigators of the SPIROMICS sites and reading centers.

Collaborators: Alexis NE, Anderson WH, Barr RG, Bleecker ER, Boucher RC, Bowler 
RP, Carretta EE, Christenson SA, Comellas AP, Cooper CB, Couper DJ, Criner GJ, 
Crystal RG, Curtis JL, Doerschuk CM, Dransfield MT, Freeman CM, Han MK, Hansel 
NN, Hastie AT, Hoffman EA, Kaner RJ, Kanner RE, Kleerup EC, Krishnan JA, LaVange 
LM, Lazarus SC, Martinez FJ, Meyers DA, Moore WC, Newell JD Jr, Paulin L, Peters 
S, Oelsner EC, O'Neal WK, Ortega VE, Paine R 3rd, Putcha N, Rennard SI, Tashkin 
DP, Scholand MB, Wells JM, Wise RA, Woodruff PG, Postow L, Croxton T.

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, and.
(2)2 Marsico Lung Institute/Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, Department of 
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina.
(3)3 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)4 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(5)5 Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Lewis Katz School of Medicine 
at Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(6)6 Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(7)7 Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New 
York.
(8)8 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, University of 
Illinois, Chicago, Illinois.
(9)9 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(10)10 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(11)11 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(12)12 Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Immunologic Diseases, 
Wake Forest Baptist Health, Winston Salem, North Carolina; and.
(13)13 Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York.

Comment in
    Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 Feb;16(2):187-188.

RATIONALE: Despite awareness of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
treatment recommendations, uptake is poor. The Subpopulations and Intermediate 
Outcome Measures in COPD Study (SPIROMICS) spans 2010-2016, providing an 
opportunity to assess integration of 2011 Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung 
Disease (GOLD) treatment strategies over time in a large observational cohort 
study.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate how COPD treatment aligns with 2011 GOLD strategies and 
determine factors associated with failure to align with recommendations.
METHODS: Information on inhaled medication use collected via questionnaire 
annually for 4 years was compiled into therapeutic classes (long-acting 
antimuscarinic agent, long-acting β-agonist, inhaled corticosteroids [ICS], and 
combinations thereof). Medications were not modified by SPIROMICS investigators. 
2011 GOLD COPD categories A, B, C, and D were assigned. Alignment of inhaler 
regimen with first-/second-line GOLD recommendations was determined, stratifying 
into recommendation aligned or nonaligned. Recommendation-nonaligned 
participants were further stratified into overuse and underuse categories.
RESULTS: Of 1,721 participants with COPD, at baseline, 52% of regimens aligned 
with GOLD recommendations. Among participants with nonaligned regimens, 46% 
reported underuse, predominately owing to lack of long-acting inhalers in GOLD 
category D. Of the 54% reporting overuse, 95% were treated with nonindicated 
ICS-containing regimens. Among 431 participants with 4 years of follow-up data, 
recommendation alignment did not change over time. When we compared 2011 and 
2017 recommendations, we found that 47% did not align with either set of 
recommendations, whereas 35% were in alignment with both recommendations.
CONCLUSIONS: Among SPIROMICS participants with COPD, nearly 50% reported inhaler 
regimens that did not align with GOLD recommendations. Nonalignment was driven 
largely by overuse of ICS regimens in milder disease and lack of long-acting 
inhalers in severe disease.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201804-283OC
PMCID: PMC6376942
PMID: 30216731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Occup Environ Med. 2018 May;75(5):382-388. doi: 10.1136/oemed-2017-104808. Epub 
2018 Mar 13.

Association of ambient pollution with inhaler use among patients with COPD: a 
panel study.

Magzamen S(1)(2), Oron AP(3), Locke ER(3), Fan VS(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Radiological Health Sciences, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
(2)Veterans Administration Eastern Colorado Health Care System, Denver, 
Colorado, USA.
(3)Veterans Administration Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

BACKGROUND: Studies have linked ambient air pollution to chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) healthcare encounters. However, the association between 
air quality and rescue medication use is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed the role of air pollution exposure for increased 
short-acting beta-2-agonist (SABA) use in patients with COPD through use of 
remote monitoring technology.
METHODS: Participants received a portable electronic inhaler sensor to record 
the date, time and location for SABA use over a 3-month period. Ambient air 
pollution data and meteorological data were collected from a centrally located 
federal monitoring station. Mixed-effects Poisson regression was used to examine 
the association of daily inhaler use with pollutant levels. Four criteria 
pollutants (PM2.5, PM10, O3 and NO2), two particulate matter species (elemental 
carbon (EC) and organic carbon), estimated coarse fraction of PM10 (PM10-2.5) 
and four multipollutant air quality measures were each examined separately, 
adjusting for covariates that passed a false discovery rate (FDR) screening.
RESULTS: We enrolled 35 patients with COPD (94.3% male and mean age: 66.5±8.5) 
with a mean forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) % predicted of 44.9+17.2. 
Participants had a median of 92 observation days (range 52-109). Participants' 
average SABA inhaler use ranged from 0.4 to 13.1 puffs/day (median 2.8). 
Controlling for supplemental oxygen use, long acting beta agonists use, 
modified Medical Research Council Dyspnoea Scale and influenza season, an IQR 
increase in PM10 concentration (8.0 µg/m3) was associated with a 6.6% increase 
in daily puffs (95% CI 3.5% to 9.9%; FDR <0.001). NO2 and EC concentration were 
also significantly associated with inhaler use (3.9% and 2.9% per IQR increase, 
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to increased ambient air pollution were associated with a 
significant increase in SABA use for patients with COPD residing in a 
low-pollution area.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/oemed-2017-104808
PMID: 29535158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


301. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2019 Jan;13(1):5-11. doi: 10.1080/17476348.2019.1548937. 
Epub 2018 Nov 27.

Beclomethasone dipropionate, formoterol fumarate and glycopyrronium bromide as a 
combination therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kupczyk M(1), Kuna P(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Internal Medicine, Asthma and Allergy , Medical University of 
Lodz , Lodz , Poland.

The triple therapy term covers the combination of inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), 
long-acting β-receptor agonist (LABA) and long acting beta agonists drug 
(LAMA) in one or in separate inhalers. The latest GOLD 2018 (Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Disease) guidelines recommend the triple therapy in the 
management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in patients of group 
D who despite the combination of two drugs: LAMA/LABA or ICS/LABA continue to 
have persistent symptoms or suffer from further frequent exacerbations. Areas 
covered: The first triple fixed-dose combination of extrafine 
beclomethasone/formoterol/glycopyrronium in one pMDI type inhaler intended for 
the treatment of COPD has been registered in Europe in 2017. Pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic properties, clinical efficacy and safety of this triple 
combination are presented in the review. Expert commentary: A 20% reduction in 
the risk of moderate or severe exacerbation was found in patients receiving 
triple therapy compared to the ICS/LABA combination and LAMA monotherapy. Triple 
therapy reduces the number of exacerbations in comparison with double 
bronchodilatation (LABA/LAMA), thus representing an interesting therapeutic 
option in the management of COPD. The profile of side effects of triple therapy 
is typical for individual active agents included in the combination.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2019.1548937
PMID: 30463457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Value Health Reg Issues. 2018 Sep;16:112-118. doi: 10.1016/j.vhri.2018.09.002. 
Epub 2018 Oct 27.

Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium versus Salmeterol/Fluticasone in Patients with COPD-A 
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis in the Czech Republic.

Skoupa J(1), Kasak V(2), Klimes J(3), Valena T(4).

Author information:
(1)CZECHTA Institute o.p.s., Prague, Czech Republic. Electronic address: 
jana.skoupa@iol.cz.
(2)Department of Respiratory Diseases, LERYMED Ltd., Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Social and Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Charles 
University, Hradec Králové, Czech Republic; Novartis s.r.o., Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(4)Novartis s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) represents an illness 
with significant healthcare and societal impacts. Fixed combinations of 
long-acting beta-agonists (LABA) and inhaled corticosteroids have been used for 
COPD treatment as the standard of care for many years. A daily dose of 
indacaterol and glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) at 110/50 µg has recently been gaining 
attention due to its improved efficacy and tolerability versus the standard of 
care.The study aims to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of once daily IND/GLY vs. 
twice daily salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SFC) at 50/500 µg in COPD 
patients.
METHODS: A microsimulation model in MS Excel was adapted to the Czech setting. 
Effectiveness data and disease severity stages were obtained from the FLAME 
study, which is a head-to head trial comparing IND/GLY vs. SFC. Quality of life 
data were derived from a literature review. Costs (medication, monitoring and 
complications) were taken from published Czech sources. The incremental 
cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) was expressed as cost per quality-adjusted life 
year (QALY) gained. Costs and outcomes were discounted at 3 %. A lifetime 
horizon was used for the analysis. Cost-effectiveness was studied from the 
perspective of a health care system in the Czech Republic.
RESULTS: Mean QALYs were higher in the IND/GLY arm (difference 0.167 QALYs). The 
ICER of IND/GLY compared with SFC was €13,628 per QALY gained. Deterministic 
sensitivity analyses and probabilistic sensitivity analyses confirmed the 
base-case result to be robust.
CONCLUSIONS: From the perspective of the Czech health care system, managing COPD 
using IND/GLY is cost-effective in this analysis because the base-case is 
clearly below the willingness-to-pay threshold in the Czech Republic, which is 
automatically set at 3 times GDP/capita (approximately €44,000/ QALY). This is 
the first available economic analysis utilizing FLAME study results in the 
Central East European (CEE) countries showing IND/ GLY as a highly 
cost-effective investment into COPD patients.

Copyright © 2018 International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes 
Research (ISPOR). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vhri.2018.09.002
PMID: 30539739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Aug;57:101802. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101802. Epub 
2019 May 13.

Efficacy and safety of the dual bronchodilator combination 
umeclidinium/vilanterol in COPD by age and airflow limitation severity: A pooled 
post hoc analysis of seven clinical trials.

Ray R(1), Tombs L(2), Naya I(3), Compton C(4), Lipson DA(5), Boucot I(6).

Author information:
(1)US Medical Affairs, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
27709-3398, USA. Electronic address: riju.x.ray@gsk.com.
(2)Precise Approach Ltd, Contingent Worker on Assignment at GSK, Stockley Park 
West, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK. Electronic address: lee.x.tombs@gsk.com.
(3)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, 
UK. Electronic address: ian.p.naya@gsk.com.
(4)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, 
UK. Electronic address: chris.h.compton@gsk.com.
(5)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, 1250 S Collegeville Rd, 
Collegeville, PA, PA, 19426, USA; Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, 3400 Civic Center Blvd, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. Electronic 
address: david.a.lipson@gsk.com.
(6)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, 
UK. Electronic address: isabelle.i.boucot@gsk.com.

BACKGROUND: Elderly patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
and those with more severe airway limitation are perceived to experience reduced 
efficacy from inhaled bronchodilators, especially those administered in a dry 
powder inhaler. This study compared the efficacy and safety of a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta-agonist dry powder combination in elderly 
patients with COPD and patients with moderate-to-very severe airflow limitation.
METHODS: This post hoc pooled analysis of seven randomized studies of ≥12 weeks' 
duration investigated the efficacy and safety of umeclidinium/vilanterol 
(UMEC/VI) 62.5/25 μg versus tiotropium (TIO) 18 μg or fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL) 250/50 μg. Change from baseline in trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), a common efficacy measure in all trials, 
proportion of FEV1 responders (≥100 mL increase from baseline) and safety 
outcomes were analyzed at Day 28, 56, and 84 in patients classified by age (<65, 
≥65, and ≥75 years of age) and severity of baseline airflow limitation (Global 
initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD] stage 2 [moderate] and 
stage 3/4 [severe/very severe]). A 24-week analysis was also conducted for the 
UMEC/VI versus TIO comparison.
RESULTS: The pooled intent-to-treat population comprised 3821 patients (≥65 
years: 44-45%; ≥75 years: 9-10%; GOLD stage 3/4: 50-55%); 2246, 874, and 701 
patients received UMEC/VI, TIO, or FP/SAL, respectively. Significant 
improvements in trough FEV1 at Day 84 were observed with UMEC/VI versus TIO or 
FP/SAL irrespective of age (all p ≤ 0.029) or GOLD stage (all p < 0.001). The 
proportion of FEV1 responders at Day 84 was significantly greater with UMEC/VI 
versus TIO or FP/SAL across all age groups (all p ≤ 0.016) and GOLD stages (all 
p < 0.001). Safety profiles were similar between treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI consistently demonstrated improved lung function versus TIO 
and FP/SAL across age and airflow limitation severity subgroups, with no safety 
concerns, indicating that UMEC/VI provides no loss in efficacy or additional 
safety concerns for both elderly patients with COPD and patients with 
severe/very severe airway limitation.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101802
PMID: 31096036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Jul 30;13:2319-2333. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S147484. eCollection 2018.

Management of severe COPD exacerbations: focus on beclomethasone 
dipropionate/formoterol/glycopyrronium bromide.

Mantero M(1)(2), Radovanovic D(3), Santus P(3), Blasi F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy, francesco.blasi@unimi.it.
(2)Internal Medicine Department, Respiratory Unit and Regional Adult Cystic 
Fibrosis Center, IRCCS Fondazione Ca' Granda Ospedale Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 
francesco.blasi@unimi.it.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (DIBIC), Pulmonary Unit, 
University of Milan, Ospedale L. Sacco, ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco, Milan, 
Italy.

The major determinant of the decline in lung function, quality of life, and the 
increased mortality risk in patients with COPD is represented by severe acute 
exacerbations of the disease, that is, those requiring patients' 
hospitalization, constituting a substantial social and health care burden in 
terms of morbidity and medical resource utilization. Different long-term 
therapeutic strategies have been proposed so far in order to prevent and/or 
reduce the clinical and social impact of these events, the majority of which 
were extrapolated from trials initially focused on the effect of long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist and subsequently on the efficacy of long-acting 
beta-agonists in combination or not with inhaled corticosteroids. The option to 
employ all three classes of molecules combined, despite the limited amount of 
evidence in our possession, represents a choice currently proposed by 
international guidelines; however, current recommendations are often based 
mainly on observational studies or on the results of secondary outcomes in 
randomized controlled trials. The present narrative review evaluates the 
available trials that investigated the efficacy of inhaled therapy to prevent 
COPD exacerbations and especially severe ones, with a particular focus on 
beclomethasone dipropionate/formoterol/glycopyrronium bromide fixed dose 
combination, which is the first treatment that comprises all the three drug 
classes, specifically tested for the prevention of moderate and severe COPD 
exacerbations.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S147484
PMCID: PMC6072677
PMID: 30104872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure MM has received reimbursement for 
travel and conference participation by Boehringer Ingelheim, Menarini, 
AstraZeneca and payment for teaching in training course by Guidotti, Malesci, 
and Grifols. DR has received speaker honoraria from Boehringer Ingelheim and 
AstraZeneca. PS received grants and personal fees from Chiesi Farmaceutici and 
Boehringer Ingelheim; grants from Air Liquide, Pfizer, and Almirall; and 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, GSK, Novartis, Menarini, Malesci, Guidotti, 
Mundipharma, and Zambon. FB received speaker or consultant honoraria or research 
funding from Menarini, Almirall, Astra-Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi 
Farmaceutici, Dompe, GlaxoSmithKline, Lab. Guidotti, Malesci, Mundipharma, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Teva, Valeas, and Zambon. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


305. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2016 Sep;13(9):1497-504. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201602-136OC.

Adherence to Maintenance Medications among Older Adults with Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease. The Role of Depression.

Albrecht JS(1), Park Y(2), Hur P(2), Huang TY(2), Harris I(3), Netzer G(1)(4), 
Lehmann SW(5), Langenberg P(1), Khokhar B(2), Wei YJ(6), Moyo P(2), 
Simoni-Wastila L(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Maryland School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)2 Department of Pharmaceutical Health Services Research, University of 
Maryland School of Pharmacy, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)3 IMPAQ International LLC, Columbia, Maryland.
(4)4 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(5)5 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; and.
(6)6 Department of Pharmaceutical Outcomes and Policy, University of Florida 
College of Pharmacy, Gainesville, Florida.

RATIONALE: Among individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
depression is one of the most common yet underrecognized and undertreated 
comorbidities. Although depression has been associated with reduced adherence to 
maintenance medications used in other conditions, such as diabetes, little 
research has assessed the role of depression in COPD medication use and 
adherence.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to assess the impact of depression 
on COPD maintenance medication adherence among a nationally representative 
sample of Medicare beneficiaries newly diagnosed with COPD.
METHODS: We used a 5% random sample of Medicare administrative claims data to 
identify beneficiaries diagnosed with COPD between 2006 and 2010. We included 
beneficiaries with 2 years of continuous Medicare Parts A, B, and D coverage and 
at least two prescription fills for COPD maintenance medications after COPD 
diagnosis. We searched for prescription fills for inhaled corticosteroids, 
long-acting β-agonists, and long acting beta agonistss and calculated 
adherence starting at the first fill. We modeled adherence to COPD maintenance 
medications as a function of new episodes of depression, using generalized 
estimated equations.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Our primary outcome was adherence to COPD 
maintenance medications, measured as proportion of days covered. The exposure 
measure was depression. Both COPD and depression were assessed using diagnostic 
codes in Part A and B data. Covariates included sociodemographics, as well as 
clinical markers, including comorbidities, COPD severity, and depression 
severity. Of 31,033 beneficiaries meeting inclusion criteria, 6,227 (20%) were 
diagnosed with depression after COPD diagnosis. Average monthly adherence to 
COPD maintenance medications was low, peaking at 57% in the month after first 
fill and decreasing to 35% within 6 months. In our adjusted regression model, 
depression was associated with decreased adherence to COPD maintenance 
medications (odds ratio, 0.93; 95% confidence interval, 0.89-0.98).
CONCLUSIONS: New episodes of depression decreased adherence to maintenance 
medications used to manage COPD among older adults. Clinicians who treat older 
adults with COPD should be aware of the development of depression, especially 
during the first 6 months after COPD diagnosis, and monitor patients' adherence 
to prescribed COPD medications to ensure best clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201602-136OC
PMCID: PMC5059501
PMID: 27332765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Respirology. 2015 Feb;20(2):304-11. doi: 10.1111/resp.12453. Epub 2014 Dec 16.

Tiotropium as part of inhaled polytherapy: adherence and associated health-care 
utilization.

Simon-Tuval T(1), Maimon N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Systems Management, Guilford Glazer Faculty of Business 
and Management, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Previous studies had demonstrated association between 
Tiotropium therapy (once-daily inhaled anticholinergic) and reductions of 
exacerbations, improvements in dyspnoea and quality of life in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients. Little is known about the 
influence of adherence to Tiotropium on health-care utilization. Our objective 
was to examine whether adherence to Tiotropium is associated with decreased 
health-care utilization.
METHODS: A computerized medical database was used to identify patients with COPD 
registered in an academic pulmonology institute who began therapy of Tiotropium 
18 mg between 2008 and 2011 (n = 193). Adherence was assessed by calculating the 
proportion of days covered and defined as coverage of at least 80% of the 
follow-up period. Adherence to long-acting beta-agonists and/or inhaled 
corticosteroids (LABA and/or ICS) and health-care utilization were analysed 1 
year before and 2 years after initiation of Tiotropium. A multivariate 
regression model was applied to examine determinants of change in health-care 
utilization.
RESULTS: The median age of study population was 67 (80% male). Forty-one percent 
of study population (n = 79) adhered to Tiotropium. Hospitalization costs 
decreased 1 year following treatment initiation only among adherent patient when 
their adherence to LABA and/or ICS improved (β = -463.6, P = 0.033). This cost 
did not change significantly in the consecutive second year (β = 206.3, P = 
0.583).
CONCLUSIONS: Adherence to Tiotropium was associated with decreased 
hospitalizations only among patients who improved their adherence to LABA and/or 
ICS as well. Exploring reasons for high non-adherence and ways to improve 
adherence may optimize utilization of the scarce hospital resources.

© 2014 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12453
PMID: 25511022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Sep 7;13:2805-2819. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S113306. eCollection 2018.

New developments in optimizing bronchodilator treatment of COPD: a focus on 
glycopyrrolate/formoterol combination formulated by co-suspension delivery 
technology.

D'Urzo AD(1), Cazzola M(2), Hanania NA(3), Buhl R(4), Maleki-Yazdi MR(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, tonydurzo@sympatico.ca.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, Tor Vergata University of 
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, Mainz, Germany.
(5)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Women's College Hospital, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

COPD causes considerable health and economic burden worldwide, with incidence of 
the disease expected to continue to rise. Inhaled bronchodilators, such as 
long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) and long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs), 
are central to the maintenance treatment of patients with COPD. Clinical studies 
have demonstrated that combined LAMA + LABA therapies improve efficacy while 
retaining a safety profile similar to LAMA or LABA alone. This has led to the 
development of several LAMA/LABA fixed-dose combination (FDC) therapies, which 
provide patients with the convenience of two active compounds in a single 
inhaler. GFF MDI (Bevespi Aerosphere®) is an FDC of glycopyrrolate/formoterol 
fumarate 18/9.6 µg formulated using innovative co-suspension delivery technology 
for administration via metered dose inhaler (MDI). GFF MDI was developed to make 
a treatment option available for patients who have a requirement or preference 
to use an MDI, rather than a dry powder or soft mist inhaler. Now that several 
LAMA/LABA FDCs have been approved for use in COPD, we review the impact of 
dual-bronchodilator treatment on COPD therapy and discuss recent clinical 
studies that are helping to develop a more comprehensive understanding of how 
LAMA/LABA FDCs can improve patient outcomes.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S113306
PMCID: PMC6135066
PMID: 30233171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure ADD has received research, 
consulting, and lecturing fees from Almirall, Altana, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim (Canada), Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, KOS Pharmaceuticals, 
Merck Canada, Methapharm, Novartis Canada/USA, Ono Pharmaceutical, Pfizer 
Canada, Schering-Plow, Sepracor, and Skyepharma. MC has participated as a 
speaker and/or advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship 
of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Lallemand, Menarini Group, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, 
Verona Pharma, and Zambon, and is or has been a consultant to ABC Farmaceutici, 
Chiesi Farmaceutici, Lallemand, Novartis, Recipharm, Teva, Verona Pharma, and 
Zambon. His institution has received grants on his behalf from Almirall, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Verona Pharma, and Zambon. NAH has participated 
in scientific advisory boards and consulted for AstraZeneca, Genentech, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, Novartis, Roche, Sunovion, and Sanofi. His institution 
has received grants on his behalf from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, and Sunovion. RB reports personal 
fees from Astra-Zeneca, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, and Takeda, and grants and 
personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Roche. MRMY has received 
research funding, consulting fees, and speaker honoraria from Almirall, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmith-Kline, 
Novartis, Merck, Ono Pharmaceuticals, and Pfizer. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


308. Respiration. 2016;91(1):79-86. doi: 10.1159/000442446. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Clinical Trial Risk in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: The Effects of 
Drug Class and Inclusion Criteria.

Tam JT(1), Parker JL, Anastasopulos D, Balter MS.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Management and Innovation, Master of Biotechnology Program, 
University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, Ont., Canada.

BACKGROUND: This study analyzed the risk of clinical trial failure in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) drug development between 1998 and 2015. We 
investigated elements that influenced clinical trial risk and factors that could 
improve outcomes during development.
OBJECTIVES: This study aims to quantify clinical trial risk for drug development 
in COPD and factors that affect clinical trial risk.
METHODS: Drugs that commenced their phase I testing in this indication from 1998 
onwards were retrieved from http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Compounds 
investigated had to have an endpoint relevant to the treatment of COPD and be 
sponsored by the pharmaceutical industry. These compounds were then analyzed 
based on their mechanism of action and trial inclusion criteria.
RESULTS: A total of 766 trials met our screening criteria representing 116 
drugs. Of these, 9 gained approval by the US FDA during our study period. The 
cumulative success rate for clinical development in COPD was 13.4%. Combination 
therapies of long-acting β-adrenoceptor agonists (LABA)/long acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMA) and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)/LABA had the highest 
success rates at 80 and 50%, respectively. The risk-adjusted cost for drug 
development in COPD was USD 532.4 million.
CONCLUSIONS: A 13.4% success rate in COPD implies that less than 1 in 7 
compounds enrolled into clinical testing would gain FDA approval. LABA/LAMA and 
ICS/LABA therapies had multiple fold increases in the success rate compared to 
other drug classes and sizably decreased the risk-adjusted cost of drug 
development. Moving forward, combination therapies may offer the lowest risk of 
clinical failure in COPD drug development.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000442446
PMID: 26695682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Respir Med. 2018 Jun;139:65-71. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.04.014. Epub 2018 Apr 
22.

Rates of escalation to triple COPD therapy among incident users of LAMA and 
LAMA/LABA.

Hahn B(1), Hull M(2), Blauer-Peterson C(3), Buikema AR(4), Ray R(5), Stanford 
RH(6).

Author information:
(1)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709-3398, USA. Electronic address: beth.a.hahn@gsk.com.
(2)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum LifeSciences, 11000 Optum 
Circle, MN101-E300, Eden Prairie, MN 55344, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.hull@optum.com.
(3)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum LifeSciences, 11000 Optum 
Circle, MN101-E300, Eden Prairie, MN 55344, USA. Electronic address: 
cori.blauer@optum.com.
(4)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum LifeSciences, 11000 Optum 
Circle, MN101-E300, Eden Prairie, MN 55344, USA. Electronic address: 
Ami.Buikema@optum.com.
(5)US Medical Affairs, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709-3398, USA. Electronic address: riju.x.ray@gsk.com.
(6)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709-3398, USA. Electronic address: richard.h.stanford@gsk.com.

BACKGROUND: Improved outcomes have been reported for patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) receiving combination long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta-agonist (LAMA/LABA) therapy compared with 
LAMA monotherapy. However, little is known about the relative characteristics of 
these patients and their rates of escalation to triple therapy (TT, combining a 
LAMA, LABA, and inhaled corticosteroid). This study aimed to characterize 
patients initiating treatment with the LAMA tiotropium (TIO) and the fixed-dose 
LAMA/LABA combination therapy umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI), and to compare 
rates of escalation to TT between patients receiving these therapies.
METHODS: Retrospective study of patients with COPD enrolled in a US health 
insurance plan during 2013-2015 and newly initiated on TIO or UMEC/VI. Patients 
were ≥40 years of age at index (date of therapy initiation) with continuous 
enrollment for 12 months pre-index and ≥30 days post-index. LAMA users were 
propensity score matched 1:1 to LAMA/LABA users, with TT initiation rates 
reported by cohort using pharmacy claims.
RESULTS: 35,357 patients initiating on TIO and 2407 patients initiating on 
UMEC/VI were identified. After propensity score matching, the rate of TT 
initiation was significantly higher in new TIO users (n = 1320) than in new 
UMEC/VI users (n = 1320) (0.92 vs 0.49 per 100 months of exposure, respectively; 
p < 0.001). Relative to the UMEC/VI cohort, the TIO cohort had an 87% higher 
risk of TT initiation (hazard ratio: 1.87; 95% confidence interval: 1.4-2.5; 
p = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients receiving UMEC/VI progressed to TT more slowly, and were 
at lower risk of progressing to TT, than patients receiving TIO.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.04.014
PMID: 29858004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Respir Med. 2018 Dec;145:130-137. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.10.024. Epub 2018 Oct 
24.

Cost-effectiveness of umeclidinium as add-on to ICS/LABA therapy in COPD: A UK 
perspective.

Driessen M(1), Shah D(2), Risebrough N(3), Baker T(4), Naya I(5), Briggs A(6), 
Ismaila AS(7).

Author information:
(1)Value Evidence & Outcomes, GSK, Brentford, Middlesex, UK. Electronic address: 
m.t.driessen@gmail.com.
(2)ICON Health Economics, ICON, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
Dhvani.Shah@iconplc.com.
(3)ICON Health Economics, ICON, Toronto, Canada. Electronic address: 
Nancy.Risebrough@iconplc.com.
(4)ICON Health Economics, ICON, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
Timothy.Baker@iconplc.com.
(5)Respiratory Medical Franchise, GSK, Brentford, Middlesex, UK. Electronic 
address: ian.p.naya@gsk.com.
(6)Health Economics and Health Technology Assessment, Institute of Health and 
Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. Electronic address: 
andrew.briggs@glasgow.ac.uk.
(7)Value Evidence & Outcomes, GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA; Department 
of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
ON, Canada. Electronic address: afisi.s.ismaila@gsk.com.

INTRODUCTION: The cost-effectiveness of long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
umeclidinium bromide (UMEC) 62.5 μg as add-on therapy to other maintenance COPD 
treatments is unknown.
METHODS: This analysis assessed the cost-effectiveness of the following in COPD: 
UMEC + fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100/25 μg (FF/VI); UMEC + fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol 250/50 μg (FP/SAL); and UMEC + several alternative choices 
of inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist (ICS/LABA). The model was 
informed with direct and indirect data from previously published studies, with a 
UK perspective and a lifetime horizon. Sensitivity analyses were also performed.
RESULTS: For the lifetime horizon, compared with FF/VI, FP/SAL and ICS/LABAs, 
addition of UMEC was associated with incremental costs per quality-adjusted 
life-years (QALY) of £4050, £7210 and £5780, respectively, and incremental costs 
per life year gain of £3380, £6020 and £4940. All UMEC-containing regimens 
resulted in numerically lower exacerbation rates versus comparator regimens over 
a lifetime horizon.
CONCLUSIONS: Addition of UMEC to various ICS/LABA treatments was associated with 
higher cost than ICS/LABA alone, but was cost-effective in most scenarios.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.10.024
PMID: 30509701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. FP Essent. 2019 Nov;486:26-32.

Respiratory Conditions: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Barstow C(1), Forbes D(1).

Author information:
(1)Womack Army Medical Center, 2817 Reilly Road Fort Bragg, NC 28310-7301.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive respiratory 
disease characterized by cough, dyspnea, and sputum production caused by 
inhalation of harmful chemicals, such as tobacco smoke. COPD should be suspected 
in patients with a significant smoking history, shortness of breath, and sputum 
production. The diagnosis is made by spirometry. A forced expiratory volume in 
the first second of expiration to forced vital capacity (FEV1/FVC) ratio of less 
than 0.7 after bronchodilator administration confirms the diagnosis. Therapy for 
patients with stable COPD should include a bronchodilator, either a long-acting 
beta2-agonist (LABA) or a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA). For patients 
who continue to experience dyspnea with a single bronchodilator, dual therapy 
with a LABA and LAMA is appropriate. For patients with continued exacerbations, 
inhaled corticosteroids can be added to LABA-LAMA therapy. Acute exacerbations 
are characterized by a worsening of symptoms that requires additional therapy. 
Short-acting beta2-agonists with or without short-acting muscarinic antagonists 
are the basic therapy for acute exacerbations of COPD. Systemic glucocorticoids 
have been shown to shorten exacerbations and improve lung function. Antibiotics 
have been shown to reduce rates of treatment failure and sputum purulence. 
Noninvasive mechanical ventilation is preferred for patients with respiratory 
failure.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 31710455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 May 25;13:1701-1711. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S168493. eCollection 2018.

Dose-response of an extrafine dry powder inhaler formulation of glycopyrronium 
bromide: randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study 
(GlycoNEXT).

Beeh KM(1), Emirova A(2), Prunier H(2), Santoro D(3), Nandeuil MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(2)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi S.A.S, Bois-Colombes, France.
(3)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: An extrafine formulation of the long acting muscarinic antagonist, 
glycopyrronium bromide (GB), has been developed for delivery via the NEXThaler 
dry powder inhaler (DPI). This study assessed the bronchodilator efficacy and 
safety of different doses of this formulation in patients with COPD to identify 
the optimal dose for further development.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, incomplete block, three-way crossover study, including three 
28-day treatment periods, each separated by a 21-day washout period. Eligible 
patients had a diagnosis of COPD and post-bronchodilator forced expiratory 
volume in 1 s (FEV1) 40%-70% predicted. Treatments administered were GB 6.25, 
12.5, 25 and 50 μg or matched placebo; all were given twice daily (BID) via DPI, 
with spirometry assessed on Days 1 and 28 of each treatment period. The primary 
end point was FEV1 area under the curve from 0 to 12 h (AUC0-12 h) on Day 28.
RESULTS: A total of 202 patients were randomized (61% male, mean age 62.6 
years), with 178 (88%) completing all the three treatment periods. For the 
primary end point, all the four GB doses were superior to placebo (p<0.001) with 
mean differences (95% CI) of 114 (74, 154), 125 (85, 166), 143 (104, 183) and 
187 (147, 228) mL for GB 6.25, 12.5, 25 and 50 μg BID, respectively. All four GB 
doses were also statistically superior to placebo for all secondary efficacy end 
points, showing clear dose-response relationships for most of the endpoints. 
Accordingly, GB 25 μg BID met the criteria for the minimally acceptable dose. 
Adverse events were reported by 15.5, 16.2, 10.9 and 14.3% of patients receiving 
GB 6.25, 12.5, 25 and 50 μg BID, respectively, and 14.8% receiving placebo.
CONCLUSION: This study supports the selection of GB 25 μg BID as the minimal 
effective dose for patients with COPD when delivered with this extrafine DPI 
formulation.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S168493
PMCID: PMC5973313
PMID: 29872288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure KMB declares that no personal 
payments were received from any pharmaceutical entity in the past 5 years. KMB 
is a full-time employee of Insaf Respiratory Research Institute. The institution 
has received compensation for services on advisory boards or consulting for 
Ablynx, Almirall, AstraZeneca, Berlin Chemie, Boehringer, Chiesi, Cytos, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Pohl Boskamp and Zentiva. The institution has received 
compensation for speaker activities in scientific meetings supported by 
Almirall, AstraZeneca, Berlin Chemie, Boehringer, Cytos, ERT, GSK, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Pohl Boskamp and Takeda. The institution has further received 
compensation for design and performance of clinical trials from Almirall, 
Altana/Nycomed, AstraZeneca, Boehringer, Cytos, GSK, Infinity, Medapharma, MSD, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Parexel, Pearl Therapeutics, Pfizer, Revotar, Teva, 
Sterna, and Zentiva. AE, HP, DS and MAN are employees of Chiesi, the study 
sponsor. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


313. COPD. 2016 Jun;13(3):293-302. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1044861. Epub 2015 Oct 
29.

The Effect on Total Mortality of Adding Inhaled Corticosteroids to Long-Acting 
Bronchodilators for COPD: A Real Practice Analysis in Italy.

Di Martino M(1), Agabiti N(1), Cascini S(1), Kirchmayer U(1), Bauleo L(1), Fusco 
D(1), Belleudi V(1), Pinnarelli L(1), Voci C(2), Patorno E(3), Pistelli R(4), 
Davoli M(1); OUTPUL Study Group.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Epidemiology , Lazio Regional Health Service , Roma , Italy.
(2)b Management Control Unit , Modena University Hospital , Modena , Italy.
(3)c Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School , Boston , 
Massachusetts , USA.
(4)d Department of Respiratory Physiology , Catholic University , Roma , Italy.

PURPOSE: Chronic therapy with long-acting bronchodilators (LB) is recommended to 
treat moderate-to-severe COPD. Although the benefits of adding inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) to LB are still unclear, patients who experience repeated 
exacerbations are suggested to add ICS to their LB treatment. The objective of 
this study is to analyze whether adding ICS to LB therapy reduces mortality.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of patients discharged from hospital with COPD 
diagnosis between 2006 and 2009. The first prescription for LB or ICS following 
discharge was defined as the index prescription. Only new users were included 
(no use of any study drug in the 6 months before treatment). A 4-day time window 
was used to classify patients into "LB alone" or "LB plus ICS" initiators. We 
used propensity score to balance the study groups. Sensitivity analyses were 
performed in patients with recent out-of-hospital exacerbations.
RESULTS: Among the 18615 adults enrolled, 12207 initiated "LB plus ICS" therapy 
and 6408 "LB alone." Crude mortality rates were 110 and 143 cases per 1000 
person-years in the "LB plus ICS" and "LB alone" groups, respectively. The 
adjusted hazard ratio (HR) was 0.83 (95% CI: 0.72-0.97; p-value: 0.024). When 
analyzing patients with recent out-of-hospital exacerbations, the benefit of the 
combination therapy was more pronounced, HR = 0.63 (95% CI: 0.44-0.90; p-value: 
0.012).
DISCUSSION: Our findings showed a beneficial effect on mortality of adding 
inhaled corticosteroids to long-acting bronchodilators. The advantage was much 
more pronounced in patients with frequent exacerbations.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1044861
PMID: 26514912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Heart. 2016 Dec 1;102(23):1909-1914. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2016-309458. Epub 
2016 Jul 5.

Underuse of β-blockers in heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Lipworth B(1), Skinner D(2), Devereux G(3), Thomas V(4), Ling Zhi Jie J(5), 
Martin J(6), Carter V(2), Price DB(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(2)Optimum Patient Care, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Applied Health Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(4)Cambridge Research Support, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute, Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Research in Real Life, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Centre for Academic Primary Care, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

Comment in
    Heart. 2016 Dec 1;102(23 ):1934.
    Heart. 2016 Dec 1;102(23 ):1934.

OBJECTIVE: Although β-blockers are an established therapy in heart failure (HF) 
guidelines, including for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), there remain concerns regarding bronchoconstriction even with 
cardioselective β-blockers. We wished to assess the real-life use of β-blockers 
for patients with HF and comorbid COPD.
METHODS: We evaluated data from the Optimum Patient Care Research Database over 
a period of 1 year for co-prescribing of β-blockers with either an ACE inhibitor 
(ACEI) or angiotensin-2 receptor blocker (ARB) in patients with HF alone versus 
HF+COPD. Association with inhaler therapy was also evaluated.
RESULTS: We identified 89 861 patients with COPD, 24 237 with HF and 10 853 with 
both conditions. In patients with HF+COPD, the mean age was 79 years; 60% were 
male, and 27% had prior myocardial infarction. Of patients with HF+COPD, 22% 
were taking a β-blocker in conjunction with either ACEI/ARB (n=2416) compared 
with 41% of patients with HF only (n=10 002) (adjusted OR 0.54, 95% CI 0.51 to 
0.58, p<0.001). Among HF+COPD patients taking inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) with 
long-acting β-agonist (LABA) and long acting muscarinic antagonist, 27% of 
patients were taking an ACEI/ARB with β-blockers (n=778) versus 46% taking an 
ACEI/ARB without β-blockers (n=1316). Corresponding figures for those patients 
taking ICS/LABA were 20% (n=583) versus 48% (n=1367), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate a substantial unmet need for patients with COPD 
who should be prescribed β-blockers more often for concomitant HF.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/heartjnl-2016-309458
PMCID: PMC5136686
PMID: 27380949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BL reports grants and personal fees from Chiesi, 
personal fees from Boerhingher Ingelheim, grants and personal fees from Meda, 
grants and personal fees from Teva, grants from Janssen, grants from 
AstraZeneca, grants from Roche, outside the submitted work; VT reports other 
from Cambridge Research Support, outside the submitted work; JL reports other 
from Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute, during the conduct of the 
study; JM reports other from Research in Real Life, outside the submitted work; 
DBP has board membership with Aerocrine, Almirall, Amgen, AstraZeneca plc, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis International AG 
and Teva. Consultancy: A Almirall, Amgen, AstraZeneca plc, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline plc, Meda, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis International AG, 
Pfizer and Teva; Grants and unrestricted funding for investigator-initiated 
studies from UK National Health Service, British Lung Foundation, Aerocrine, 
AKL, Almirall, AstraZeneca plc, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Eli Lilly, 
GlaxoSmithKline plc, Meda, Merck & Co., Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis 
International AG, Orion, Pfizer, Respiratory Effectiveness Group, Takeda, Teva 
and Zentiva; Payments for lectures/speaking: Almirall, AstraZeneca plc, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, GlaxoSmithKline plc, Kyorin, Meda, Merck & 
Co., Mundipharma, Novartis International AG, Pfizer, SkyePharma, Takeda and 
Teva; Payment for manuscript preparation: Mundipharma and Teva; Patents 
(planned, pending or issued): AKL; Payment for the development of educational 
materials: GlaxoSmithKline plc, Novartis International AG; Stock/Stock options: 
Shares in AKL which produces phytopharmaceuticals and owns 80% of Research in 
Real Life and its subsidiary social enterprise Optimum Patient Care; received 
payment for travel/accommodations/meeting expenses from Aerocrine, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis International AG and Teva; Funding for 
patient enrolment or completion of research: Almirral, Chiesi, Teva and Zentiva; 
Peer reviewer for grant committees: Medical Research Council (2014), Efficacy 
and Mechanism Evaluation programme (2012), HTA (2014).


315. Respir Res. 2016 Nov 8;17(1):145. doi: 10.1186/s12931-016-0467-8.

Non-neuronal cholinergic system contributes to corticosteroid resistance in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients.

Milara J(1)(2)(3)(4), Cervera A(5), de Diego A(6), Sanz C(7)(8), Juan G(5), 
Gavaldà A(9), Miralpeix M(9), Morcillo E(10)(8)(11), Cortijo J(10)(8)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of pharmacology, faculty of medicine, Jaume I University, 
Castellón, Spain. xmilara@hotmail.com.
(2)Pharmacy Unit, University General Hospital Consortium, Valencia, Spain. 
xmilara@hotmail.com.
(3)CIBERES, Health Institute Carlos III, Valencia, Spain. xmilara@hotmail.com.
(4)Unidad de Investigación Clínica, Consorcio Hospital General Universitario, 
Avenida tres cruces s/n, E-46014, Valencia, Spain. xmilara@hotmail.com.
(5)Respiratory Unit, University General Hospital Consortium, Valencia, Spain.
(6)Respiratory Unit, University and Polytechnic La Fe Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
(7)Department of pharmacology, faculty of medicine, Jaume I University, 
Castellón, Spain.
(8)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Valencia, 
Valencia, Spain.
(9)Almirall, R&D Centre, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)CIBERES, Health Institute Carlos III, Valencia, Spain.
(11)Health Research Institute INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain.
(12)Research and teaching Unit, University General Hospital Consortium, 
Valencia, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) with long-acting beta-2 agonists is a 
well-documented combination therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) based on its additive anti-inflammatory properties. By contrast, the 
recommendation of ICS in combination with long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) is not evidence-based. In this study, neutrophils obtained from COPD 
patients were used to compare the anti-inflammatory effects of aclidinium 
bromide (a long acting muscarinic antagonist) with corticosteroids and their 
potential additive effect.
METHODS: Human sputum and blood neutrophils were isolated from healthy 
individuals (n = 37), patients with stable COPD (n = 52) and those with 
exacerbated COPD (n = 16). The cells were incubated with corticosteroid 
fluticasone propionate (0.1 nM-1 μM), aclidinium bromide (0.1 nM-1 μM) or a 
combination thereof and stimulated with 1 μg of lipopolysaccharide/ml or 5 % 
cigarette smoke extract. Levels of the pro-inflammatory mediators interleukin-8, 
matrix metalloproteinase-9, CCL-5, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor and interleukin-1β were measured and the mechanisms of corticosteroid 
resistance evaluated at the end of the incubation.
RESULTS: The non-neuronal cholinergic system was over-expressed in neutrophils 
from COPD patients, as evidenced by increases in the expression of muscarinic 
receptors (M2, M4 and M5), choline acetyltransferase and vesicular acetylcholine 
transporter. Aclidinium bromide demonstrated anti-inflammatory effects on 
neutrophils from COPD patients, reversing their resistance to corticosteroids. 
Additive effects of combined aclidinium bromide and fluticasone propionate in 
blocking M2 receptor levels, inhibiting phosphoinositide 3-kinase-δ and 
enhancing the glucocorticoid response element transcription factor were 
demonstrated and were accompanied by an increase in the corticosteroid-induced 
expression of anti-inflammatory-related genes.
CONCLUSIONS: LAMAs potentiate the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids 
in neutrophils from COPD patients in vitro, thus providing a scientific 
rationale for their use in combination with corticosteroids in the treatment of 
COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-016-0467-8
PMCID: PMC5101693
PMID: 27825347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Respirology. 2015 Nov;20(8):1222-8. doi: 10.1111/resp.12641. Epub 2015 Sep 15.

Efficacy and safety of aclidinium bromide in patients with COPD: A phase 3 
randomized clinical trial in a Korean population.

Lee SH(1), Lee J(1), Yoo KH(2), Uh ST(3), Park MJ(4), Lee SY(5), Kim JY(6), Kim 
DK(7), Kim SJ(8), Lee KH(9), Yoo CG(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Paul's Hospital, The Catholic University 
of Korea College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Konkuk University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Soonchunhyang University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Kyung Hee University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul Metropolitan Governmental Seoul 
National University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic 
University of Korea College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Yeungnam University College of Medicine, 
Daegu, Korea.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Aclidinium bromide ('aclidinium') is a novel, inhaled 
long acting muscarinic antagonist. Therapeutic effects of aclidinium on chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have been demonstrated in Caucasian 
populations in several clinical trials. This was a randomized, double-blind, 
multi-centre phase-3 clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of 
aclidinium in a Korean population.
METHODS: A total of 263 Korean patients with moderate-to-severe COPD were 
randomized to receive aclidinium (400 μg, bd) (Genuai) or placebo via a 
dry-powder inhaler. The primary end point was change in trough forced expiratory 
volume in one second (FEV1 ) at 12 weeks. Other lung function measurements, COPD 
exacerbation, health status (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), 
dyspnoea (Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) and safety were assessed throughout the 
study period.
RESULTS: A significant improvement in trough FEV1 from baseline was shown with 
aclidinium compared with the placebo (0.126 L, P < 0.0001). Significant 
improvements were also demonstrated in peak FEV1 (0.190 L, P < 0.0001), SGRQ and 
TDI. Furthermore, aclidinium significantly reduced the prevalence of 
exacerbations (aclidinium, 5.4%; placebo, 15.6%, P < 0.05), and the duration of 
exacerbations was shorter compared with placebo (rate ratio: 0.27; P < 0.05). 
Aclidinium (400 μg) was well tolerated and the prevalence of adverse events was 
comparable with the placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled aclidinium (400 μg) was shown to be safe and efficacious in 
Korean patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01636401 at Clinicaltrials.gov.

© 2015 The Authors. Respirology published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12641
PMID: 26370136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Nihon Rinsho. 2016 May;74(5):813-9.

[Role of bronchodilators in therapy for COPD-mechanisms of LABA and LAMA on 
airway smooth muscle].

[Article in Japanese]

Kume H.

Long-acting beta-adrenergic receptor agonists (LABAs) and anticholinergics (LAMAs) 
are widely used clinically as therpy for COPD. Clinical reports have 
demonstrated that LABAs (salmeterol, formoterol, indacaterol, olodaterol, 
vilanterol) and LAMAs (tiotropium, glycopyrronium, umeclidinium, aclidinium) are 
useful to improving symptoms and lung function, and to reducing exacerbation and 
hospitarization. LABAs expect salmeterol are strong partial agonists, and LAMAs 
are non-specific antagonists. Ca2+ dynamics and Ca2+ sensitization contribute to 
relaxation of airway smooth muscle in these bronchodilators. LABAs act on 
orthosteric and allosteric sites on the beta-adrenergic receptors. In contrast, 
LAMAs act not only on orthosteric site on the muscarinic receptors, but also 
allosteric site on the beta-adrenergic receptors, leading to enhancing 
beta-adrenergic action. Allosteric GPCR modulation is involved in the synergistic 
effects between LABAs and LAMAs.

PMID: 27254952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 4;14:181-194. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S179912. eCollection 2019.

Effects of baseline symptom burden on treatment response in COPD.

Martinez FJ(1), Abrahams RA(2)(3), Ferguson GT(4), Bjermer L(5), Grönke L(6), 
Voß F(7), Singh D(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical 
College, New York, NY, USA, fjm2003@med.cornell.edu.
(2)Morgantown Pulmonary Clinical Research, Morgantown, WV, USA.
(3)Department of Pulmonary & Critical Care, Mon Health Care, Morgantown, WV, 
USA.
(4)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(6)Biotechnology, CSL Behring, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(7)Biostatistics + Data Sciences Corp., Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. 
KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(8)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

RATIONALE: In symptomatic patients with COPD, the decision whether to initiate 
maintenance treatment with a single agent or a combination of long-acting 
bronchodilators remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether baseline symptomatic status influences 
response to tiotropium/olodaterol treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Post hoc analysis of the randomized OTEMTO® studies 
(NCT01964352; NCT02006732), in which patients with moderate-to-severe COPD 
received placebo, tiotropium 5 µg, tiotropium/olodaterol 2.5/5 µg, or 
tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 µg once daily for 12 weeks via the Respimat® inhaler 
(Boehringer Ingelheim, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany). Impact of baseline 
symptomatic status (modified Medical Research Council [mMRC] score) on response 
to treatment with tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 µg, tiotropium 5 µg, or placebo at 
Week 12 was assessed by St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score 
and response rate, transition dyspnea index (TDI) focal score and response rate, 
and trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second response.
RESULTS: Tiotropium/olodaterol improved SGRQ total scores and response rates 
compared with placebo and tiotropium for patients with baseline mMRC scores 0-1 
and ≥2. For tiotropium/olodaterol vs tiotropium, greater improvements were 
observed for patients with mMRC ≥2 (SGRQ score adjusted mean treatment 
difference -3.44 [95% CI: -5.43, -1.46]; P=0.0007; SGRQ response rate ORs 2.09 
[95% CI: 1.41, 3.10]; P=0.0002). Dyspnea, measured by TDI score, was 
consistently improved with tiotropium/olodaterol vs placebo for patients with 
mMRC scores 0-1 and ≥2 (adjusted mean treatment difference 1.63 [95% CI: 1.06, 
2.20]; P<0.0001 and 1.60 [95% CI: 1.09, 2.10]; P<0.0001, respectively). In 
patients with mMRC scores 0-1 and ≥2, tiotropium/olodaterol consistently 
improved TDI response rate and lung function vs placebo and tiotropium.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with COPD with more severe baseline dyspnea appear to 
derive greater health status benefit with tiotropium/olodaterol compared with 
tiotropium alone.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S179912
PMCID: PMC6324615
PMID: 30655665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure FJM reports grants from NHLBI during 
the conduct of the study, grants from National Institutes of Health, personal 
fees from Continuing Education, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Nycomed/Takeda, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bellerophon Therapeutics 
(formerly Ikaria), Genentech, Novartis, Pearl, Roche, Sunovion, Theravance, CME 
Incite, Annenberg Center for Health Sciences at Eisenhower, Integritas, 
InThought, National Association for Continuing Education, Paradigm Medical 
Communications, LLC, PeerVoice, UpToDate, Haymarket Communications, Western 
Society of Allergy and Immunology, ProterixBio (formerly Bioscale), Unity 
Biotechnology, Concert Pharmaceuticals, Lucid, Methodist Hospital, Columbia 
University, Prime Healthcare Ltd, WebMD, PeerView Network, California Society of 
Allergy and Immunology, Chiesi, and Puerto Rico Thoracic Society, and advisory 
board participation for Janssen. RA reports grants and personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, and GlaxoSmithKline, and grants from Pearl 
Therapeutics. GTF reports consulting and advisory board fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Pearl Therapeutics, Novartis, Forest, Sunovion, and 
Verona, consulting fees from Receptos, speaker fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Pearl Therapeutics, Forest, and Sunovion, and 
research grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Pearl Therapeutics, 
Sunovion, Novartis, Theravance, Sanofi, Forest, and GlaxoSmithKline. LB reports 
advisory board participation or personal fees for lectures from ALK, Airsonett, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Glaxo SmithKline, Novartis, Takeda, 
and Teva. FV is an employee of Boehringer Ingelheim. LG was an employee at the 
time of the conduct of the study, and is currently employed by CSL Behring. DS 
reports personal fees from Apellis, Cipla, Genentech, Peptinnovate, and Vectura 
(formerly Skyepharma), and grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, Glenmark, Merck, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Pulmatrix, 
Teva, Theravance, and Verona. The authors report no other conflicts of interest 
in this work.


319. Respir Med. 2017 Nov;132:238-250. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.07.011. Epub 2017 Jul 
19.

Efficacy and safety of glycopyrrolate/eFlow(®) CS (nebulized glycopyrrolate) in 
moderate-to-very-severe COPD: Results from the glycopyrrolate for obstructive 
lung disease via electronic nebulizer (GOLDEN) 3 and 4 randomized controlled 
trials.

Kerwin E(1), Donohue JF(2), Goodin T(3), Tosiello R(3), Wheeler A(3), Ferguson 
GT(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Inc., Medford, OR, USA. 
Electronic address: ekerwin@criresearch.com.
(2)University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., Marlborough, MA, USA.
(4)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: SUN-101 is a combination of glycopyrrolate delivered through an 
innovative, electronic nebulizer, intended for the treatment of patients with 
COPD. The objective of this study was to assess the efficacy and safety of this 
new drug device combination.
METHODS: Replicate Phase III randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
studies were conducted to evaluate the efficacy and safety of glycopyrrolate 
solution administered by an investigational eFlow® Closed System (eFlow® CS) 
nebulizer in subjects with moderate-to-very-severe COPD, including those with 
continued background use of a long-acting beta2-agonist ± inhaled corticosteroid 
and/or history of cardiovascular (CV) disease. Subjects were randomized in a 
1:1:1 ratio to receive placebo or glycopyrrolate (25 μg or 50 μg twice daily 
[BID]) for 12 weeks. The primary efficacy endpoint was the change from baseline 
in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) at Week 12 compared with 
placebo. Secondary endpoints included change from baseline in forced vital 
capacity (FVC) after 12 weeks, change from baseline in health status measured by 
St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) at 12 weeks/end of study (EOS), and 
change in rescue medication use, as well as change from baseline in FEV1 area 
under the curve from 0 to 12 h after 12 weeks in the GOLDEN 3 sub-study. Daytime 
and night-time symptoms were recorded using an electronic diary. Safety was 
monitored throughout the study, including major adverse cardiovascular events.
RESULTS: A total of 653 subjects were randomized in GOLDEN 3 and 641 in GOLDEN 
4. Treatment with glycopyrrolate 25 μg BID and 50 μg BID resulted in 
statistically significant and clinically important changes from baseline in 
trough FEV1 compared with placebo at Week 12 (GOLDEN 3: 0.105 L and 0.126 L; 
p ≤ 0.0001; GOLDEN 4: 0.084 L and 0.082 L; p ≤ 0.0001). Nebulized glycopyrrolate 
25 μg BID and 50 μg BID also resulted in improvements in FVC change from 
baseline versus placebo at Week 12 (GOLDEN 3: 0.149 L and 0.167 L, p < 0.001; 
GOLDEN 4: 0.130 L and 0.113 L, p < 0.01), and in SGRQ change from baseline score 
versus placebo at Week 12/EOS (GOLDEN 3: -3.072 [p < 0.05] and -1.848; GOLDEN 
4: -3.585 and -3.557, p < 0.01). LS mean change from baseline in 
EXACT-respiratory symptoms total score at Week 12 for placebo and nebulized 
glycopyrrolate 25 and 50 μg BID were -0.936, -1.903 and -1.502 for GOLDEN 3 
and -0.376, -1.647 and -1.532 for GOLDEN 4. Rescue medication use was unchanged. 
Nebulized glycopyrrolate was well tolerated at both doses based on the incidence 
of adverse events and CV events.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of these studies demonstrated statistically significant 
and clinically important improvements in pulmonary function and patient-reported 
health outcomes, with an acceptable safety profile, support the use of 
glycopyrrolate/eFlow® CS as a potential maintenance treatment for 
moderate-to-very-severe COPD.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.07.011
PMID: 28838685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Rev Mal Respir. 2016 Dec;33(10):911-936. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2016.10.004. Epub 
2016 Nov 25.

Pharmacological treatment optimization for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. Proposals from the Société de Pneumologie de Langue Française.

Zysman M(1), Chabot F(1), Devillier P(2), Housset B(3), Morelot-Panzini C(4), 
Roche N(5); Société de Pneumologie de Langue Française (SPLF).

Author information:
(1)EA Ingres, département de pneumologie, université de Lorraine, CHU de Nancy, 
54500 Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, France.
(2)UPRES EA 220, département des maladies des voies respiratoires, hôpital Foch, 
université Versailles-Saint-Quentin, 92150 Suresnes, France.
(3)Service de pneumologie, UPEC, université Paris-Est, UMR S955, centre 
hospitalier intercommunal de Créteil, 94000 Créteil, France.
(4)Service de pneumologie et réanimation médicale, groupe hospitalier 
Pitié-Salpêtrière Charles-Foix, Inserm, université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie, UMRS 
1158, 75013 Paris, France.
(5)Service de pneumologie, hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, EA2511, université Paris 
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75014 Paris, France. Electronic address: 
nicolas.roche@aphp.fr.

Erratum in
    Rev Mal Respir. 2017 Feb;34(2):175-176.

The Société de Pneumologie de Langue Française proposes a decision algorithm on 
long-term pharmacological COPD treatment. A working group reviewed the 
literature published between January 2009 and May 2016. This document lays out 
proposals and not guidelines. It only focuses on pharmacological treatments 
except vaccinations, smoking cessation treatments and oxygen therapy. Any COPD 
diagnosis, based on pulmonary function tests, should lead to recommend smoking 
cessation, vaccinations, physical activity, pulmonary rehabilitation in case of 
activity limitation, and short-acting bronchodilators. Symptoms like dyspnea and 
exacerbations determine the therapeutic choices. In case of daily dyspnea and/or 
exacerbations, a long-acting bronchodilator should be suggested (beta-2 agonist, 
LABA or anticholinergics, LAMA). A clinical and lung function reevaluation is 
suggested 1 to 3 months after any treatment modification and every 3-12 months 
according to the severity of the disease. In case of persisting dyspnea, a fixed 
dose LABA+LAMA combination improves pulmonary function (FEV1), quality of life, 
dyspnea and decreases exacerbations without increasing side effects. In case of 
frequent exacerbations and a FEV1≤70%, a fixed dose long-acting bronchodilator 
combination or a LABA+ inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) combination can be 
proposed. A triple combination (LABA+LAMA+ICS) is indicated when exacerbations 
persist despite one of these combinations. Dyspnea in spite of a bronchodilator 
combination or exacerbations in spite of a triple combination should lead to 
consider other pharmacological treatments (theophylline if dyspnea, macrolides 
if exacerbations, low-dose opioids if refractory dyspnea).

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2016.10.004
PMID: 27890625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Respir Med. 2015 May;109(5):616-24. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.02.004. Epub 2015 
Feb 18.

Improvements in patient-reported outcomes: A prospective, non-interventional 
study with aclidinium bromide for treatment of COPD.

Marth K(1), Schuller E(2), Pohl W(3).

Author information:
(1)Karl Landsteiner Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pneumology, Hietzing 
Hospital, Wolkersbergenstraße 1, 1130 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Almirall GmbH, Breitenfurter Straße 113, 1120 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Karl Landsteiner Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pneumology, Hietzing 
Hospital, Wolkersbergenstraße 1, 1130 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
wolfgang.pohl@wienkav.at.

BACKGROUND: The inhaled long acting muscarinic antagonist aclidinium bromide has 
been shown to significantly improve lung function parameters and symptom 
severity in patients with COPD in randomised placebo- and active-controlled 
clinical studies. To obtain a comprehensive view of the treatment effects, 
patient-reported outcomes were investigated in a real-life COPD population in 
routine clinical practice in Austria.
METHODS: Multicentre, prospective, non-interventional study in patients with 
COPD who were newly initiated on treatment with Eklira® Genuair® (aclidinium 
bromide; recommended dose 400 μg twice daily) as first-line or add-on therapy. 
Patients were either treatment naïve or switched from other COPD medications. 
Health-related quality of life by means of the COPD Assessment Test™ (CAT) and 
symptom-related variables were evaluated at the first visit (baseline) and after 
approximately 12 weeks of treatment. Features of the inhaler were assessed by 
patients and physicians at the follow-up visit.
RESULTS: A total of 795 COPD patients (56% male; median age: 64 years) were 
enrolled and treated. During the observational period, the proportion of 
patients with at least moderate nighttime symptoms, early-morning symptoms, and 
limitations in morning activities decreased from 45.0% to 21.4%, from 57.7% to 
26.0%, and from 49.9% to 25.3%, respectively. All improvements from baseline in 
symptom severity and activity limitation were statistically significant (p < 
0.0001, all tests). The mean (±SD) frequency of nocturnal awakenings decreased 
from 1.2 (±1.4) to 0.7 (±1.2) times per night (p < 0.0001). Quality of life 
improved significantly in patients treated with aclidinium bromide over 3 months 
compared to baseline (p < 0.0001; mean CAT total score: 18.5 ± 7.5 vs. 13.8 ± 
7.3). Up to 90% of the patients and up to 91% of the physicians assessed 
individual features of the inhaler as 'very good' or 'good'. Aclidinium bromide 
was well tolerated; 6.9% of the patients reported adverse drug reactions, none 
of which were serious.
CONCLUSIONS: This non-interventional study indicated beneficial effects of 
Eklira® Genuair® in the treatment of COPD with regard to nighttime and 
early-morning symptoms, limitation of morning activities, and quality of life 
under routine conditions. The acceptance of the inhaler device was high, which 
is a prerequisite to ensure adherence in long-term therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.02.004
PMID: 25796962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jan 5;10:57-68. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S72650. 
eCollection 2015.

Efficacy and safety of once-daily glycopyrronium in predominantly Chinese 
patients with moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the 
GLOW7 study.

Wang C(1), Sun T(1), Huang Y(2), Humphries M(3), Bai L(3), Li L(3), Wang Q(3), 
Kho P(4), Firth R(4), D'Andrea P(5).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Hospital, Dongcheng District, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Hainan Provincial People's Hospital, Xiuying District, Haikou, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Beijing Novartis Pharma Co Ltd, Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park, Shanghai, People's 
Republic of China.
(4)Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Horsham, West Sussex, UK.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015;10:1513.

BACKGROUND: Glycopyrronium is a once-daily (od) long acting muscarinic 
antagonist for the maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). The GLOW7 study evaluated the efficacy and safety of od 
glycopyrronium 50 μg in predominantly Chinese patients with moderate-to-severe 
COPD.
METHODS: In this 26-week, multi-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
parallel-group study, men and women ≥40 years with moderate-to-severe COPD were 
randomized to glycopyrronium 50 μg od or placebo (2:1). The primary objective 
was to confirm the significant improvement of trough forced expiratory volume in 
1 second (FEV1) following 12 weeks of treatment with glycopyrronium compared 
with placebo. Secondary objectives included the effect of glycopyrronium on 
health status (St George's Respiratory Questionnaire), breathlessness 
(Transition Dyspnea Index), other lung function parameters, rescue medication 
use, and COPD exacerbations. Safety and tolerability were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Of the 460 patients randomized, 459 were included in the full analysis 
set (glycopyrronium, n=306; placebo, n=154; mean age 64.7 years; mean 
post-bronchodilator FEV1: 50.8% predicted); 425 (92.4%) completed the study. At 
Week 12, glycopyrronium signifcantly improved trough FEV1 with a least square 
means treatment difference of 141 mL (95% confidence interval 111 mL, 171 mL; 
P<0.001) compared with placebo. The mean treatment effect of glycopyrronium was 
greater than the minimum clinically important difference versus placebo in both 
St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score (-4.92; P<0.001) and 
Transition Dyspnea Index focal score (1.0; P<0.001) at week 26. Glycopyrronium 
reduced the risk of exacerbations in terms of time to first moderate or severe 
exacerbation by 28% (P=0.153) and rate of moderate or severe COPD exacerbation 
by 29% (P=0.119) compared with placebo. Incidence of death was 1.3% with 
glycopyrronium and 0% in placebo during the treatment period. Overall incidence 
of adverse events (glycopyrronium 43.6%; placebo 47.4%) and serious adverse 
events (glycopyrronium 5.6%; placebo 9.1%) were similar.
CONCLUSION: In predominantly Chinese patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, od 
glycopyrronium 50 μg significantly improved lung function, dyspnea, and health 
status compared with placebo. The safety and tolerability profile of 
glycopyrronium was comparable to placebo.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S72650
PMCID: PMC4293291
PMID: 25609940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jun 14;12:1731-1740. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S121723. eCollection 2017.

Improvement in 24-hour bronchodilation and symptom control with aclidinium 
bromide versus tiotropium and placebo in symptomatic patients with COPD: post 
hoc analysis of a Phase IIIb study.

Beier J(1), Mroz R(2)(3), Kirsten AM(4), Chuecos F(5), Gil EG(5).

Author information:
(1)insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(2)Centrum Medycyny Oddechowej.
(3)Medical University of Białystok, Białystok, Poland.
(4)Pulmonary Research Institute at LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research 
Center North, German Center for Lung Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany.
(5)AstraZeneca PLC, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: A previous Phase IIIb study (NCT01462929) in patients with moderate 
to severe COPD demonstrated that 6 weeks of treatment with aclidinium led to 
improvements in 24-hour bronchodilation comparable to those with tiotropium, and 
improvement of symptoms versus placebo. This post hoc analysis was performed to 
assess the effect of treatment in the symptomatic patient group participating in 
the study.
METHODS: Symptomatic patients (defined as those with Evaluating Respiratory 
Symptoms [E-RS™] in COPD baseline score ≥10 units) received aclidinium bromide 
400 μg twice daily (BID), tiotropium 18 μg once daily (QD), or placebo, for 6 
weeks. Lung function, COPD respiratory symptoms, and incidence of adverse events 
(AEs) were assessed.
RESULTS: In all, 277 symptomatic patients were included in this post hoc 
analysis. Aclidinium and tiotropium treatment improved forced expiratory volume 
in 1 second (FEV1) from baseline to week 6 at all time points over 24 hours 
versus placebo. In addition, improvements in FEV1 from baseline during the 
nighttime period were observed for aclidinium versus tiotropium on day 1 
(aclidinium 157 mL, tiotropium 67 mL; P<0.001) and week 6 (aclidinium 153 mL, 
tiotropium 90 mL; P<0.05). Aclidinium improved trough FEV1 from baseline versus 
placebo and tiotropium at day 1 (aclidinium 136 mL, tiotropium 68 mL; P<0.05) 
and week 6 (aclidinium 137 mL, tiotropium 71 mL; P<0.05). Aclidinium also 
improved early-morning and nighttime symptom severity, limitation of 
early-morning activities, and E-RS Total and domain scores versus tiotropium 
(except E-RS Chest Symptoms) and placebo over 6 weeks. Tolerability showed 
similar incidence of AEs in each arm.
CONCLUSION: In this post hoc analysis of symptomatic patients with moderate to 
severe COPD, aclidinium 400 μg BID provided additional improvements compared 
with tiotropium 18 μg QD in: 1) bronchodilation, particularly during the 
nighttime, 2) daily COPD symptoms (E-RS), 3) early-morning and nighttime 
symptoms, and 4) early-morning limitation of activity.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S121723
PMCID: PMC5476673
PMID: 28652725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure JB has received consulting fees, 
speaker’s fees, and travel expenses from AstraZeneca and has also received 
compensation for organizing or participating in advisory boards for Cytos, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Almirall, AstraZeneca, Novartis, and Revotar 
Biopharmaceuticals. The institution where JB is currently employed has received 
compensation for the design, performance, or participation in single or 
multicenter clinical trials in the past 5 years from several companies including 
Almirall, Altana, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cytos, GSK, Meda 
Pharmaceuticals, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, and Revotar 
Biopharmaceuticals. RM has received consulting fees, speaker’s fees, and travel 
expenses from Boehringer Ingelheim and has also received compensation for 
participating in advisory boards for Boehringer Ingelheim, Almirall, 
AstraZeneca, and Novartis. Furthermore, RM has received compensation for 
participation in multicenter clinical trials in the past 5 years from several 
companies including Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Merck 
Sharp & Dohme, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pearl, Roche, and Takeda. A-MK is a 
current employee of Pulmonary Research Institute at LungenClinic Grosshansdorf; 
the institution received compensation for the design of and/or participation in 
clinical trials from Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Infinity Pharmaceuticals, TEVA, Sterna Biologicals, Chiesi, Bayer, and 
Takeda. Furthermore, A-MK has received consulting fees, and speaker’s fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Roche. FC and EGG are employees of 
AstraZeneca PLC, Barcelona, Spain, and former employees of Almirall S.A., 
Barcelona, Spain.


324. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Apr 27;11:891-8. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S103023. eCollection 2016.

Impact of tiotropium + olodaterol on physical functioning in COPD: results of an 
open-label observational study.

Sauer R(1), Hänsel M(2), Buhl R(3), Rubin RA(4), Frey M(5), Glaab T(6).

Author information:
(1)Lung Centre Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(3)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, Mainz, Germany.
(4)Pulmonary Specialist Practice, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(5)Biometrics, Alcedis GmbH, Gießen, Germany.
(6)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany; Pulmonary 
Department, Mainz University Hospital, Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Maintaining and improving physical functioning is key to mitigating 
the cycle of deconditioning associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). We evaluated the impact of free combination of the long-acting 
anticholinergic tiotropium plus the long-acting beta-agonist olodaterol on 
physical functioning in a real-world clinical setting.
METHODS: In this open-label noninterventional study, Global initiative for 
chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) B-D patients with COPD aged ≥40 years 
were treated for 4-6 weeks with either tiotropium 5 μg + olodaterol 5 μg (both 
via Respimat(®) inhaler) or tiotropium 18 μg (HandiHaler(®)) + olodaterol 5 μg 
(Respimat(®)) once daily. Physical functioning was assessed by the self-reported 
10-item Physical Functioning Questionnaire (PF-10). The primary end point was 
the percentage of patients achieving therapeutic success, defined as a 10-point 
increase in the PF-10 between baseline (visit 1) and weeks 4-6 (visit 2). 
Secondary end points included absolute PF-10 scores, Physicians' Global 
Evaluation, satisfaction with Respimat(®) and adverse events.
RESULTS: A total of 1,858 patients were treated: 1,298 (69.9%) with tiotropium 5 
μg + olodaterol 5 μg and 560 (30.1%) with tiotropium 18 μg + olodaterol 5 μg. At 
study end, 1,683 (92.6%) and 1,556 patients (85.6%) continued using tiotropium 
and olodaterol, respectively; 48.9% (95% confidence interval: 46.5, 51.3) 
achieved the primary end point. Therapeutic success rates were significantly 
higher for maintenance-naïve patients compared to those who had received prior 
therapy (59.1% vs 44.5%; P<0.0001), largely driven by 
maintenance-treatment-naïve GOLD B (59.8%) and C (63.0%) patients. Absolute 
physical functioning scores increased from an average baseline of 44.0 (standard 
deviation: 25.2) to 54.2 (standard deviation: 26.9) at visit 2. Patients' 
general condition improved from baseline to visit 2, and patients were largely 
satisfied with the Respimat(®) inhaler. Adverse events were reported by 7.5% of 
patients; the most common were respiratory in nature.
CONCLUSION: Tiotropium + olodaterol improved physical functioning within 4-6 
weeks in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD. GOLD B and C patients with 
no prior maintenance treatment demonstrated the greatest benefit.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S103023
PMCID: PMC4853152
PMID: 27217742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Arch Bronconeumol. 2015 Aug;51(8):403-16. doi: 10.1016/j.arbres.2014.11.017. 
Epub 2015 Jan 14.

ALAT-2014 Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Clinical Practice 
Guidelines: questions and answers.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Montes de Oca M(1), López Varela MV(2), Acuña A(3), Schiavi E(4), Rey MA(2), 
Jardim J(5), Casas A(6), Tokumoto A(7), Torres Duque CA(6), Ramírez-Venegas 
A(8), García G(9), Stirbulov R(10), Camelier A(11), Bergna M(12), Cohen M(13), 
Guzmán S(14), Sánchez E(3).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Universitario de Caracas, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, 
Venezuela. Electronic address: montesdeoca.maria@gmail.com.
(2)Universidad de la República, Hospital Maciel, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(3)Hospital Universitario de Caracas, Universidad Central de Venezuela, y Centro 
Médico Docente La Trinidad, Caracas, Venezuela.
(4)Hospital de Rehabilitación Respiratoria «María Ferrer», Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(5)Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brasil.
(6)Fundación Neumológica Colombiana, Bogotá, Colombia.
(7)Hospital Central Fuerza Aérea del Perú, Lima, Perú
(8)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Ciudad de México, México.
(9)Hospital Rodolfo Rossi, La Plata, Argentina.
(10)Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Santa Casa de San Pablo, São Paulo, Brasil.
(11)Universidade Federal da Bahia e Escola Bahiana de Medicina, Salvador, 
Brasil.
(12)Hospital Dr. Antonio Cetrángolo, Vicente López, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(13)Hospital Centro Médico, Guatemala, Guatemala.
(14)Hospital José Gregorio Hernández, Caracas, Venezuela.

ALAT-2014 COPD Clinical Practice Guidelines used clinical questions in PICO 
format to compile evidence related to risk factors, COPD screening, disease 
prognosis, treatment and exacerbations. Evidence reveals the existence of risk 
factors for COPD other than tobacco, as well as gender differences in disease 
presentation. It shows the benefit of screening in an at-risk population, and 
the predictive value use of multidimensional prognostic indexes. In stable COPD, 
similar benefits in dyspnea, pulmonary function and quality of life are achieved 
with LAMA or LABA long-acting bronchodilators, whereas LAMA is more effective in 
preventing exacerbations. Dual bronchodilator therapy has more benefits than 
monotherapy. LAMA and combination LABA/IC are similarly effective, but there is 
an increased risk of pneumonia with LABA/IC. Data on the efficacy and safety of 
triple therapy are scarce. Evidence supports influenza vaccination in all 
patients and anti-pneumococcal vaccination in patients <65years of age and/or 
with severe airflow limitation. Antibiotic prophylaxis may decrease exacerbation 
frequency in patients at risk. The use of systemic corticosteroids and 
antibiotics are justified in exacerbations requiring hospitalization and in some 
patients managed in an outpatient setting.

Copyright © 2014 SEPAR. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arbres.2014.11.017
PMID: 25596991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. JAMA. 2019 May 7;321(17):1693-1701. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.4973.

Effect of Aclidinium Bromide on Major Cardiovascular Events and Exacerbations in 
High-Risk Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: The ASCENT-COPD 
Randomized Clinical Trial.

Wise RA(1), Chapman KR(2), Scirica BM(3)(4), Bhatt DL(3)(4), Daoud SZ(5), 
Zetterstrand S(6), Reisner C(5), Gil EG(7).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)AstraZeneca Research and Development Centre, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(6)AstraZeneca Research and Development, Bioinformatics and Information 
Sciences, Mölndal, Sweden.
(7)AstraZeneca Research and Development Centre, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.7720.

IMPORTANCE: There is concern that long acting muscarinic antagonists increase 
cardiovascular morbidity or mortality in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: To determine the cardiovascular safety (noninferiority) and efficacy 
(superiority) of aclidinium bromide, 400 μg twice daily, in patients with COPD 
and cardiovascular disease or risk factors.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, 
double-blind, parallel-design study conducted at 522 sites in North America. A 
total of 3630 patients with moderate to very severe COPD and either a history of 
cardiovascular disease or at least 2 atherothrombotic risk factors were 
randomized; follow-up occurred for up to 3 years until at least 122 major 
adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) occurred. The first patient was enrolled on 
October 16, 2013 and the last on August 22, 2016. The final patient completed 
follow-up on September 21, 2017.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to receive aclidinium (n = 1812) or 
placebo (n = 1818) by dry-powder inhaler, twice daily for up to 3 years.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary safety end point was time to first MACE 
over up to 3 years (hazard ratio [HR] 1-sided 97.5% CI noninferiority 
margin = 1.8). The primary efficacy end point was the annual COPD exacerbation 
rate during the first year of treatment. Secondary outcomes included an expanded 
MACE definition (time to first MACE or serious cardiovascular event of interest) 
and annual rate of exacerbations requiring hospitalization.
RESULTS: Among 3589 patients analyzed (mean age, 67.2 years; 58.7% male), 2537 
(70.7%) completed the study. Of these, 69 (3.9%) aclidinium and 76 (4.2%) 
placebo patients had a MACE (HR, 0.89; 1-sided 97.5% CI, 0-1.23); the expanded 
MACE definition included 168 (9.4%) aclidinium vs 160 (8.9%) placebo patients 
with events (HR, 1.03; 1-sided 97.5% CI, 0-1.28). Annual moderate to severe 
exacerbation rates (aclidinium, 0.44; placebo, 0.57; rate ratio, 0.78; 2-sided 
95% CI, 0.68-0.89; P < .001) and rate of exacerbations requiring hospitalization 
(aclidinium, 0.07; placebo, 0.10; rate ratio, 0.65; 2-sided 95% CI, 0.48-0.89; 
P = .006) decreased significantly with aclidinium vs placebo. The most common 
adverse events were pneumonia (aclidinium, 109 events [6.1%]; placebo, 105 
events [5.8%]), urinary tract infection (aclidinium, 93 events [5.2%]; placebo, 
89 events [5.0%]), and upper respiratory tract infection (aclidinium, 86 events 
[4.8%]; placebo, 101 events [5.6%]).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with COPD and increased cardiovascular 
risk, aclidinium was noninferior to placebo for risk of MACE over 3 years. The 
rate of moderate to severe COPD exacerbations was reduced over the first year.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01966107.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2019.4973
PMCID: PMC6506885
PMID: 31063575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Wise 
reported receipt of personal fees from AstraZeneca, Contrafect, Pulmonx, 
Novartis, Mylan, Theravance, Roche, Spiration, Sunovion, Merck, Circassia, 
Pneuma, Verona, Bonti, Denali, Aradigm, Regeneron, Kiniksa, Syneos, and 
Propeller Health; grants from Pearl Therapeutics; and grants and personal fees 
from AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Boehringer Ingelheim, and GlaxoSmithKline. Dr 
Chapman reported receipt of personal fees from Merck and the Canadian Institutes 
of Health Research–GlaxoSmithKline; grants from Baxter, GlaxoSmithKline, Amgen, 
and Shire; and grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
CSL Behring, Grifols, Sanofi, Genentech, Kamada, Roche, and Novartis. Dr Scirica 
reported receipt of personal fees from AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Biogen Idec, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Covance, Dr Reddy’s Laboratories, Eisai, Elsevier Practice 
Update Cardiology, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, and St Jude 
Medical; grants from AstraZeneca, Novartis, and Merck; and equity from Health at 
Scale Technologies. Dr Bhatt reported receipt of grants from Forest 
Laboratories/AstraZeneca, Amarin, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eisai, Ethicon, 
Medtronic, Sanofi-Aventis, The Medicines Company, Roche, Pfizer, Ischemix, 
Amgen, Lilly, Chiesi, Ironwood, Abbott, Regeneron, PhaseBio, Idorsia, and 
Synaptic; receipt of personal fees from Duke Clinical Research Institute, Mayo 
Clinic, Population Health Research Institute, Belvoir Publications, Slack 
Publications, WebMD, Elsevier, HMP Global, Harvard Clinical Research Institute 
(now Baim Institute for Clinical Research), Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology, Cleveland Clinic, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, TobeSoft, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bayer, Medtelligence/ReachMD, the American College of 
Cardiology, and the Society of Cardiovascular Patient Care; receipt of travel 
reimbursement from the American College of Cardiology, the Society of 
Cardiovascular Patient Care, and the American Heart Association; associate 
editorship for the American College of Cardiology; unfunded research 
collaboration for FlowCo, PLx Pharma, Takeda, Merck, Novo Nordisk, and Fractyl; 
advisory board membership for Medscape Cardiology, Regado Biosciences, and 
Cardax; board of directorship for Boston VA Research Institute; deputy 
editorship for Clinical Cardiology; chairing the VA Cardiovascular Assessment, 
Reporting and Tracking System (CART) program’s Research and Publications 
Committee; participating as site co-investigator for St Jude Medical (now 
Abbott), Biotronik, Boston Scientific, and Svelte; and provision of editorial 
support services for Boehringer Ingelheim and Novo Nordisk. Drs Daoud, 
Zetterstrand, and Garcia Gil are employees of AstraZeneca. Dr Reisner is an 
employee of Pearl Therapeutics, a member of the AstraZeneca Group.


327. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2015 Apr;9(2):56-68. doi: 10.1177/1753465815575254. Epub 
2015 Mar 9.

Clinicopharmacological profile of the fixed-dose combination of aclidinium 
bromide and formoterol fumarate in the management of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Babu KS(1), Morjaria JB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Portsmouth, UK.
(2)Department of Academic Respiratory Medicine, Hull York Medical School, 
University of Hull, Castle Hill Hospital, Castle Road,Cottingham HU16 5JQ, UK 
jaymin.morjaria@hey.nhs.uk.

The recent Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) guidelines consider symptoms and 
exacerbation history in addition to the degree of airflow obstruction for 
classifying patients. The improvement of symptoms is principally provided by 
bronchodilators, using beta agonists and antimuscarinic agents. Aclidinium bromide 
is a novel long-acting antimuscarinic agent licensed for use in patients with 
COPD. Novel fixed-dose combinations that are either licensed or in their late 
phase of development include vilanterol/umeclidinium, 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium, olodaterol/tiotropium and formoterol/aclidinium. 
Fixed-dose combinations of aclidinium/formoterol have been evaluated in COPD 
patients and evidence suggests that this is efficacious, safe, has a quick onset 
of action and is well tolerated. This review provides a clinico-pharmacological 
profile of this compound.

© The Author(s), 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1753465815575254
PMID: 25754881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 May;16(7):1079-90. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.2015.1032247. Epub 2015 Apr 5.

QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium) for the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Matera MG(1), Rogliani P, Cazzola M.

Author information:
(1)Second University of Naples, Department of Experimental Medicine , Naples , 
Italy mariagabriella.matera@unina2.it.

INTRODUCTION: The combination of two bronchodilators with different mechanisms 
of action to treat patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is 
an established medical practice, but the dissimilarities in the onset and 
duration of action of long-acting beta-agonists (LABA) and long acting muscarinic 
agents (LAMA) and differences in the devices used for the delivery of these 
drugs make free combinations uncomfortable and unpredictable, especially if 
focused on adherence to prescribed treatment. Therefore, there is the need for 
fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of bronchodilators in a single inhaler.
AREAS COVERED: The results of the pivotal Phase III IGNITE and EXPEDITION 
programs show that QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium FDC) is able to elicit a 
significant improvement in lung function and patient-reported outcomes, 
including breathlessness and rescue medication use, reduced rates of COPD 
exacerbations and health-related quality of life when compared with current 
standard of care. Moreover, QVA149 is generally well tolerated, with most 
adverse events being of mild-to-moderate severity.
EXPERT OPINION: Given that the LABA/LAMA coformulation is the most powerful 
bronchodilator available, QVA149, which has been the first LABA/LAMA FDC to be 
developed, should be considered central in the maintenance treatment of COPD, 
and could be a potential option for improving lung function and health status in 
maintenance-naïve patients.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1032247
PMID: 25843089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2018 Apr;49:67-74. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.01.007. Epub 
2018 Feb 4.

Cardiovascular safety profile of a fixed-dose combination of glycopyrrolate and 
formoterol fumarate delivered via metered dose inhaler using co-suspension 
delivery technology.

Ferguson GT(1), Reisner C(2), Pearle J(3), DePetrillo P(4), Maes A(5), Martin 
UJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI 
48336, USA. Electronic address: garytferguson@msn.com.
(2)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., 280 Headquarters Plaza, East Tower, 2nd Floor, 
Morristown, NJ 07960, USA; AstraZeneca, One MedImmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD 
20878, USA. Electronic address: creisner@pearltherapeutics.com.
(3)California Research Medical Group, Inc, 301 West Bastanchury Road, Fullerton, 
CA 92835, USA. Electronic address: jpearlemd@hotmail.com.
(4)SNBL Clinical Pharmacology Center, Inc, Room 5-15 800 W. Baltimore St., 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Electronic address: pdepetrillo@snbl-cpc.com.
(5)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., 280 Headquarters Plaza, East Tower, 2nd Floor, 
Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic address: amaes@pearltherapeutics.com.
(6)AstraZeneca, One MedImmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA. Electronic 
address: Ubaldo.Martin@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: Glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF) metered dose inhaler (MDI) 
is a fixed-dose combination of the long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), 
glycopyrrolate (GP), and the long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), formoterol fumarate 
(FF), delivered via metered dose inhaler using innovative co-suspension delivery 
technology. Here we report the results of two studies that examined the 
cardiovascular safety of GFF MDI.
METHODS: The thorough QT (TQT) study was a Phase I, randomized, double-blind, 
single-dose, crossover study to assess GFF MDI 18/9.6 (Bevespi Aerosphere®), GFF 
MDI 144/38.4 and GP MDI 144 μg, compared with placebo MDI and open-label 
moxifloxacin 400 mg (active control) in healthy volunteers (PT003009). The 
cardiovascular safety study in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) was a Phase IIb, randomized, multicenter, double-blind, 14-day 
dosing, parallel-group study to evaluate GFF MDI 36/9.6, GP MDI 36 and FF MDI 
9.6 μg compared with open-label FF dry powder inhaler (DPI; Foradil® Aerolizer®) 
12 μg, in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD (PT003003 [NCT01349803]).
RESULTS: Seventy healthy volunteers were randomized in the TQT study. GFF MDI 
144/38.4, GFF MDI 18/9.6 and GP MDI 144 μg all met the confidence interval-based 
criteria for negative QT prolongation potential. In the study in patients with 
COPD, 237 subjects were randomized and treated. GFF MDI 36/9.6, GP MDI 36, and 
FF MDI 9.6 μg did not result in clinically meaningful changes from baseline in 
24-h mean heart rate at Day 14 (primary endpoint) or in any of the other Holter 
monitoring endpoints at Day 14, compared with FF DPI 12 μg.
CONCLUSIONS: No clinically significant effects on cardiovascular safety occurred 
at therapeutic or supratherapeutic doses of GFF MDI, apart from a small and 
transient increase in heart rate following supratherapeutic dose of GFF MDI 
144/38.4 μg. Furthermore, there were no unexpected safety findings reported in 
either healthy volunteers or patients with COPD.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.01.007
PMID: 29567116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Ter Arkh. 2019 Mar 30;91(3):76-85. doi: 10.26442/00403660.2019.03.000136.

New opportunities of dual bronchodilation therapy for patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Avdeev SN(1)(2), Trushenko NV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University of the Ministry of Health 
of the Russian Federation (Sechenov University), Moscow, Russia.
(2)Pulmonology Scientific Research Institute under Federal Medical and 
Biological Agency of Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia.

Currently, combinations of long-acting beta2-agonists and long-acting 
anticholinergics are considered as the basic therapy for majority of patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). These combinations have 
different pharmacological characteristics and delivery devices that provides 
different clinical effects and new opportunities for personalized treatment of 
COPD. Aclidinium/formoterol fixed combination differs from other dual 
bronchodilators by twice-daily dosing regimen, good safety profile and a 
specific delivery system. Recent information on clinical efficacy and safety of 
aclidinium/formoterol combination in COPD patients is given in this article.

DOI: 10.26442/00403660.2019.03.000136
PMID: 31094464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Respir Res. 2016 Jun 18;17(1):73. doi: 10.1186/s12931-016-0387-7.

Effects of tiotropium + olodaterol versus tiotropium or placebo by COPD disease 
severity and previous treatment history in the OTEMTO® studies.

Singh D(1), Gaga M(2), Schmidt O(3), Bjermer L(4), Grönke L(5), Voß F(5), 
Ferguson GT(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, The Medicines Evaluation Unit, 
University Hospital of South Manchester Foundation Trust, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, Southmoor Road, Manchester M23 9QZ, UK. 
dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(2)Athens Chest Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(3)Lungen- und Bronchialheilkunde, Koblenz, Germany.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(6)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: As lung function declines rapidly in the early stages of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the effects of bronchodilators in patients 
with moderate disease and those who have not previously received maintenance 
therapy are of interest. OTEMTO® 1 and 2 were two replicate, 12-week, Phase III 
studies investigating the benefit of tiotropium + olodaterol on lung function 
and quality of life in patients with moderate to severe disease. Post hoc 
analyses were performed to assess the benefits for patients according to disease 
severity and treatment history.
METHODS: Four subgroup analyses were performed: Global initiative for chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2/3, GOLD A/B/C/D, treatment naive/not treatment 
naive and receiving inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) at baseline/not receiving ICS 
at baseline. Primary end points were change in forced expiratory volume in 1 s 
(FEV1) area under the curve from 0 to 3 h response, change in trough FEV1 and St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score. Transition Dyspnoea Index 
(TDI) focal score was a secondary end point, and SGRQ and TDI responder analyses 
were further end points; all were assessed at 12 weeks.
RESULTS: In all subgroups, patients receiving tiotropium + olodaterol responded 
better overall than those receiving tiotropium monotherapy. Improvements with 
tiotropium + olodaterol over placebo or tiotropium monotherapy were noted across 
GOLD 2/3 and GOLD A/B/C/D; however, improvements in SGRQ total score were most 
evident in the GOLD B subgroup. Moreover, lung-function outcomes were generally 
greater in those patients who had been receiving previous long-acting 
bronchodilator and/or ICS maintenance treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that tiotropium + olodaterol should be 
considered as a treatment option in patients with moderate COPD who are 
initiating maintenance therapy, as well as those with more severe disease.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01964352 and NCT02006732 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-016-0387-7
PMCID: PMC4912717
PMID: 27316465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Clin Respir J. 2019 Nov;13(11):663-673. doi: 10.1111/crj.13073. Epub 2019 Sep 2.

Fixed-dose combination of umeclidinium and vilanterol for patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: A systematic review.

Ramadan WH(1), Al Masri S(2), Rizk J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy, Lebanese American 
University, Byblos, Lebanon.
(2)GlaxoSmith Kline, Beirut, Lebanon.
(3)Bellevue Medical Center, Mansourieh, Lebanon.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common respiratory disease 
that is predicted to be one of the leading causes of death worldwide. 
Pharmacologic treatment options of COPD are bronchodilators, using either 
long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs), or long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), 
or a combination of two. Anoro Ellipta (umeclidinium + vilanterol) dry powder 
inhaler, a fixed-dose combination of LAMA and LABA, was Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approved in 2013 for COPD. The objective of this study is 
to evaluate the efficacy and safety of once daily umeclidinium/vilanterol 
(62.5 mcg/25 mcg) in COPD patients, focusing on pharmacodynamic and 
pharmacokinetic characteristics, efficacy and safety in clinical studies and 
cost. Literature search was done through PubMed (2004-2017) using the terms 
umeclidinium, vilanterol, COPD, LABA and LAMA. Recent and significant clinical 
trials about the monocomponents and their combination were identified, in 
addition to reviews, guidelines for COPD, data from manufacturer and FDA product 
labels. The search was limited to English language studies on human subjects. 
Clinical data published on the combination of umeclidinium/vilanterol in 
patients with COPD have shown greater improvements in lung function compared to 
monotherapies. However, further studies comparing umeclidinium/vilanterol FDC 
(ANORO) to other LABA/LAMA combinations are needed.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13073
PMID: 31389190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2018 May 24;28(1):18. doi: 10.1038/s41533-018-0084-8.

Comparison of glycopyrronium versus tiotropium on the time to clinically 
important deteriorations in patients with COPD: a post-hoc analysis of 
randomized trials.

D'Urzo A(1), Bader G(2), Shen S(2), Goyal P(2), Altman P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. tonydurzo@sympatico.ca.
(2)Novartis Pharma AG, Fabrikstrasse 2, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.

Glycopyrronium is a once-daily, inhaled long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
demonstrating similar efficacy to inhaled tiotropium in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD; however, the benefit of LAMAs on COPD symptoms has been 
variable. COPD is a progressive disease in which many patients develop an acute 
or sustained deterioration. Data on the prevention of clinically important 
deteriorations (CID) using LAMAs are limited. A pooled analysis was performed on 
four Phase III trials (n = 2936) that compared the efficacy of glycopyrronium 
(n = 1859) with tiotropium (n = 1077). The primary endpoint was significant 
delay and/or reduction in the occurrence of CID. CID was defined as any of the 
following: ≥100 mL decrease from baseline in pre-dose forced expiratory volume 
in 1 second (FEV1), ≥4 point increase in St George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
score or a moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbation occurring after the first dose 
of study medication. A sustained CID was a CID occurring on ≥2 consecutive 
visits 4 weeks apart or for ≥50% of all available subsequent visits. Baseline 
characteristics for the overall population were similar. Patients had moderate 
(62%) or severe (38%) COPD. Mean post-bronchodilator FEV1 was approximately 55% 
predicted, and mean FEV1 reversibility was 16.7 and 18.6% in the glycopyrronium 
and tiotropium groups, respectively. Both glycopyrronium and tiotropium 
significantly reduced time to CID and sustained CID versus placebo (p < 0.001). 
No statistically significant differences were found between the glycopyrronium 
and tiotropium treatment groups in time to CID or sustained CID. Glycopyrronium 
is effective in delaying time to clinically important deteriorations, with 
similar efficacy to tiotropium.

DOI: 10.1038/s41533-018-0084-8
PMCID: PMC5967309
PMID: 29795478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.D′U. has received research, consulting and 
lecturing fees from GlaxoSmithkline, Sepracor, Schering Plough, Altana, 
Methapharma, AstraZeneca, ONO pharma, Novartis, KOS Pharmaceuticals, Almirall SA 
and Forest Laboratories. A.D′U. is also an Associate Editor of npj Primary Care 
Respiratory Medicine. P.A. is a full-time employee of Novartis Pharmaceutical 
Co. P.G., G.B. and S.S. are full-time employees of Novartis Pharma AG.


334. Lung. 2016 Apr;194(2):259-66. doi: 10.1007/s00408-015-9839-y. Epub 2016 Jan 13.

Effects of Adding Tiotropium or Aclidinium as Triple Therapy Using Impulse 
Oscillometry in COPD.

Manoharan A(1), Morrison AE(1), Lipworth BJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, Ninewells Hospital and Medical 
School, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 9SY, Scotland, UK.
(2)Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, Ninewells Hospital and Medical 
School, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 9SY, Scotland, UK. 
b.j.lipworth@dundee.ac.uk.

INTRODUCTION: long acting muscarinic antagonists confer improvements in 
spirometry when used in addition to inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting 
beta-agonists (ICS/LABA) in COPD. The dual objectives of this proof of concept 
study were to evaluate trough effects of tiotropium (TIO) or aclidinium (ACL) 
when used as triple therapy and to assess if impulse oscillometry (IOS) might be 
more sensitive than spirometry in detecting subtle differences in bronchodilator 
response.
METHODS: Patients with moderate to severe COPD already taking ICS/LABA were 
randomized to receive add-on therapy in cross-over fashion with either TIO 18 µg 
od or ACL 322 µg bid for 2-3 weeks each. Measurements of IOS, spirometry, 6-min 
walk test, St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) and Baseline/Transition 
Dyspnoea Index (TDI) were made at baseline and after chronic dosing at trough 
(12 h for ACL and 24 h for TIO), in addition to domiciliary diurnal spirometry.
RESULTS: 13 patients were completed: mean age 69 years, FEV1 52 % predicted, 
FEV1/FVC 0.48, and R5 202 % predicted. There were no differences in any 
visit-based trough IOS or spirometry outcomes comparing TIO versus ACL. Resonant 
frequency but not total airway resistance at 5 Hz (R5) significantly improved 
from baseline with both treatments while peripheral airway resistance (R5-R20) 
significantly improved with ACL. Visit-based FEV1, and forced and relaxed vital 
capacity were also significantly improved from baseline with both treatments. 
There were no significant differences in diurnal FEV1 and FEV6 profiles between 
treatments. 6-min walk distance and post-walk fatigue significantly improved 
from baseline with ACL, while post-walk dyspnea improved with TIO. SGRQ symptom 
score significantly improved to a similar degree with both treatments. TDI 
significantly improved with ACL versus TIO by 1.54 units.
CONCLUSION: We observed comparable bronchodilator efficacy at trough with TIO 
and ACL when used as triple therapy in COPD, while IOS was no more sensitive 
than spirometry.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-015-9839-y
PMCID: PMC4799274
PMID: 26758884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Feb;81(2):379-88. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12808. Epub 2015 
Dec 23.

Tiotropium Respimat(®) vs. HandiHaler(®): real-life usage and TIOSPIR trial 
generalizability.

Schmiedl S(1)(2), Fischer R(3), Ibanez L(4)(5), Fortuny J(6), Thürmann P(1)(2), 
Ballarin E(4), Ferrer P(4), Sabaté M(4), Rottenkolber D(7)(8), Gerlach R(9), 
Tauscher M(9), Reynolds R(10), Hasford J(11), Rottenkolber M(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Faculty of Health, 
Witten/Herdecke University, Witten, Germany.
(2)Philipp Klee-Institute for Clinical Pharmacology, HELIOS Clinic Wuppertal, 
Wuppertal, Germany.
(3)Pneumologische Praxis Muenchen - Pasing, Munich, Germany.
(4)Fundació Institut Català de Farmacologia, Hospital Universitari Vall 
d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Departament de Farmacologia, Terapèutica i Toxicologia, Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Novartis Farmaceutica S.A., Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Institute of Health Economics and Management, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet 
Muenchen, Munich, Germany.
(8)Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen - German Research Center for Environmental Health, 
Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Neuherberg, Germany.
(9)National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians of Bavaria, 
Munich, Germany.
(10)Pfizer, New York, NY, USA.
(11)Institute for Medical Information Sciences, Biometry, and Epidemiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet Muenchen, Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Aug;82(2):564-5.
    Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Aug;82(2):562-3.

AIM: Two inhaler devices (Respimat® and HandiHaler®) are available for 
tiotropium, a long acting anticholinergic agent. We aimed to analyze drug 
utilization, off-label usage and generalizability of the TIOSPIR trial results 
for both devices.
METHODS: Patients aged ≥18 years exhibiting at least one documented prescription 
of tiotropium in the database of the Association of Statutory Health Insurance 
Physicians, Bavaria, Germany, were included (years 2004-2008). Annual period 
prevalence rates (PPRs) were calculated stratified by age, gender and inhaler 
devices. Off-label usage (patients lacking a chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) diagnosis) and the proportion of patients meeting the inclusion 
and exclusion criteria of the TIOSPIR trial were analyzed.
RESULTS: Between 2004 and 2008, PPRs increased and varied between 49.2 and 74.5 
per 10 000 persons for HandiHaler® and between 1.5 and 9.3 per 10 000 persons 
for Respimat®. Small differences regarding patient characteristics existed 
between the two inhaler devices. Only about 30% (HandiHaler® 32.1%, Respimat® 
30.0%) of the database patients receiving tiotropium could be theoretically 
included in the TIOSPIR trial.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparing the two tiotropium devices, no clinically relevant 
differences regarding patient and prescribing characteristics were revealed. 
Results of the TIOSPIR trial were generalizable only to a minority of our study 
patients, underlining the need for real-life data.

© 2015 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12808
PMCID: PMC4833170
PMID: 26506314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2015 Feb;9(1):23-33. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2015.996133. 
Epub 2014 Dec 30.

Glycopyrronium bromide for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Riario-Sforza GG(1), Ridolo E, Riario-Sforza E, Incorvaia C.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Rehabilitation, ICP Hospital, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Expert Rev Respir Med. 2015;9(6):677.
    Expert Rev Respir Med. 2015;9(6):675-6.

Glycopyrronium bromide is a new long acting muscarinic antagonist to be used 
once-daily, which is approved as a bronchodilator for the symptomatic 
maintenance treatment of adult patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). In the Glycopyrronium bromide in chronic Obstructive pulmonary 
disease airWays trials, treatment with inhaled glycopyrronium bromide at 50 μg 
once daily achieved a significantly better lung function than placebo, as 
measured by the trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD. The lung function improvement was maintained for up to 
52 weeks. Other improved indexes were dyspnea scores, health status, 
exacerbation rates and time of exercise endurance. Studies comparing the 
efficacy of glycopyrronium versus tiotropium bromide found substantial 
equivalence of the two drugs. Glycopyrronium was generally well tolerated. These 
data add inhaled glycopyrronium bromide to the treatment of patients with 
moderate to severe COPD as an effective once-daily LAMA.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2015.996133
PMID: 25547422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;13:1753466619850725. doi: 
10.1177/1753466619850725.

Aclidinium bromide in fixed-dose combination with formoterol fumarate in the 
management of COPD: an update on the evidence base.

D'Urzo AD(1), Singh D(2), Donohue JF(3), Chapman KR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON 12354, Canada.
(2)Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester University NHS Foundations Trust, 
Manchester, UK.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
North Carolina Pulmonary Critical Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Asthma and Airway Center, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate (AB/FF) 400/12 µg is a twice-daily 
long acting muscarinic receptor antagonist and long-acting beta agonist 
(LAMA/LABA) dual-bronchodilator maintenance therapy used to relieve symptoms and 
reduce future risk of exacerbations in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). To date, there have been several clinical studies and post hoc 
analyses of AB/FF, assessing treatment outcomes in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD. These studies have looked at a range of outcomes, 
including lung function parameters, patient-reported symptom scores, 
quality-of-life measures assessing impaired health and perceived well-being, and 
the frequency, duration, and severity of exacerbations. In light of the major 
2017 revision to the Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) recommendations, and the subsequent updates, we present an update on the 
latest evidence supporting the efficacy and safety of AB/FF. This review 
discusses the clinical relevance of the improvements in lung function, symptoms, 
quality of life, and exacerbations in patients with COPD reported in the phase 
III and IV trials of AB/FF. Given the current concerns over unnecessary inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) use in COPD, we also touch briefly on the use of blood 
eosinophils as a biomarker for identifying those patients with COPD already 
using LAMA/LABA therapy for whom the addition of ICS might be of benefit.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466619850725
PMCID: PMC6535700
PMID: 31096854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: AD has received 
research, consulting, and lecturing fees from Almirall, Altana, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, KOS 
Pharmaceuticals, Merck Canada, Methapharm, Novartis Canada/USA, ONO 
Pharmaceutical Co., Pfizer Canada, Schering-Plough, Sepracor, and SkyePharma. DS 
has received sponsorship to attend international meetings, honoraria for 
lecturing or attending advisory boards and research grants from various 
pharmaceutical companies including Apellis, Astra-Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Cipla, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, Johnson and Johnson, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Peptin-novate, Pfizer, Pulmatrix, SkyPharma, Teva, 
Theravance, and Verona. JFD has received consulting fees from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Sunovian, and Theravance. He is 
a member of the Data Monitoring Committee for AstraZeneca, Gilead, and InsMED. 
KRC has consulted (in the last 3 years) with AstraZeneca, Baxter, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, CSL Behring, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Kamada, Novartis, Roche, and 
Teva; has undertaken research funded by Amgen, AstraZeneca, Baxter, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, CSL Behring, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Mereo 
BioPharma, Novartis, Regeneron, Roche, and Sanofi; and has participated in 
continuing medical education activities sponsored in whole or in part by 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Glaxo-SmithKline, Grifols, Merck Frosst, 
Novartis, and Pfizer. He is also participating in research funded by the 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research operating grant [entitled ‘Canadian 
Cohort Obstructive Lung Disease (CanCOLD)’] and holds the GSK-CIHR Research 
Chair in Respiratory Health Care Delivery at the University Health Network, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.


338. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jul 7;12:2001-2014. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S137659. eCollection 2017.

Bronchodilator efficacy of extrafine glycopyrronium bromide: the Glyco 2 study.

Singh D(1), Scuri M(2), Collarini S(2), Vezzoli S(2), Mariotti F(2), Muraro 
A(2), Acerbi D(2).

Author information:
(1)Medicines Evaluation, University Of Manchester, University Hospital of South 
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(2)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.

An extrafine formulation of the long acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium 
bromide (GB) is in development for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
in combination with beclometasone dipropionate and formoterol fumarate - a 
"fixed triple". This two-part study was randomized, double blind, placebo 
controlled in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD: Part 1: single-dose 
escalation, GB 12.5, 25, 50, 100 or 200 μg versus placebo; Part 2: repeat-dose 
(7-day), four-period crossover, GB 12.5, 25 or 50 μg twice daily (BID) versus 
placebo, with an open-label extension in which all patients received tiotropium 
18 μg once daily. On the morning of Day 8 in all five periods, patients also 
received formoterol 12 μg. In study Part 1, 27 patients were recruited. All GB 
doses significantly increased from baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
(FEV1) area under the curve (AUC0-12h) and peak FEV1, with a trend toward 
greater efficacy with higher GB dose. All adverse events were mild-moderate in 
severity, with a lower incidence with GB than placebo and no evidence of a 
dose-response relationship. In study Part 2, of 38 patients recruited, 34 
completed the study. Adjusted mean differences from placebo in 12 h trough FEV1 
on Day 7 (primary) were 115, 142 and 136 mL for GB 12.5, 25 and 50 μg BID, 
respectively (all P<0.001). GB 25 and 50 μg BID were superior (P<0.05) to GB 
12.5 μg BID for pre-dose morning FEV1 on Day 8. For this endpoint, GB 25 and 50 
μg BID were also superior to tiotropium. Compared with Day 7, addition of 
formoterol significantly increased Day 8 FEV1 peak and AUC0-12h with all GB 
doses and placebo (all P<0.001). All adverse events were mild-moderate in 
severity and there was no indication of a dose-related relationship. This study 
provides initial evidence on bronchodilation, safety and pharmacokinetics of 
extrafine GB BID. Overall, the results suggest that GB 25 μg BID is the optimal 
dose in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S137659
PMCID: PMC5511020
PMID: 28744115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure DS has received sponsorship to attend 
international meetings, honoraria for lecturing or attending advisory boards and 
research grants from various pharmaceutical companies including Almirall, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, 
Johnson and Johnson, Merck, NAPP, Novartis, Pfizer, Skypharma, Takeda, Teva, 
Therevance and Verona. MS, SC, SV, FM, AM and DA are employees of Chiesi 
Farmaceutici SpA, the study sponsor. The authors report no other conflicts of 
interest in this work.


339. Res Social Adm Pharm. 2019 Jun;15(6):761-766. doi: 
10.1016/j.sapharm.2018.09.008. Epub 2018 Sep 19.

The delicate choice of optimal basic therapy for multimorbid older adults: A 
cross-sectional survey.

Sirois C(1), Lunghi C(2), Laroche ML(3), Maheux A(4), Frini A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Laval 
University, Quebec, Canada; Quebec Centre of Excellence on Aging, Quebec, 
Canada. Electronic address: caroline.sirois@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, University of Sherbrooke, Canada; Department 
of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, Italy. Electronic 
address: carolotta.lunghi@USherbrooke.ca.
(3)Service de Pharmacologie, Toxicologie et Pharmacovigilance, Centre Régional 
de Pharmacovigilance, de Pharmacoépidémiologie et d'information sur les 
médicaments, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Limoges, France; Faculty of 
Medicine, Limoges University, Limoges, France. Electronic address: 
Marie-Laure.Laroche@chu-limoges.fr.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy, Laval University, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: 
Alicia.Maheux.1@ulaval.ca.
(5)Department of Management, UQAR, Lévis, Canada. Electronic address: 
Anissa_Frini@uqar.ca.

BACKGROUND: Clinical practice guidelines are useful to suggest pharmacological 
therapies for the treatment of single chronic diseases. However, there is little 
guidance for multimorbidity, and specific quality measures for people with 
multimorbidity that can be used at a population level are lacking.
OBJECTIVE: To describe what pharmacists and geriatricians consider to be an 
optimal basic pharmacological therapy for an older individual with type 2 
diabetes (DM), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and heart failure 
(HF).
METHODS: An online cross-sectional survey among 162 pharmacists and 
geriatricians, in Quebec, Canada, was performed. Participants were invited to 
choose, from a list of 32 medications or classes, the optimal basic therapy for 
an individual aged 65-75 years with the 3 chronic diseases. Descriptive 
statistics were used to calculate the median number of medications chosen and 
the proportions of participants who chose each medication, according to the 
participant's specialty. A Kruskall-Wallis test was performed to detect whether 
there were differences in the median number of medications recommended according 
to speciality.
RESULTS: There was little consensus on the optimal basic pharmacological therapy 
for this hypothetical multimorbid individual, with 157 different combinations 
provided by the 162 participants. Nevertheless, 5 classes were chosen by at 
least 75% of the participants: metformin, long acting beta agonists agents, 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers 
(ARBs), beta-blockers, and short-acting beta-agonists. The median number of 
recommended medications was 10 (interquartile range [IQR]: 6-13). There was a 
statistically significant difference between specialties (p = 0.0396). 
Geriatricians recommended the lower median number of medications, 7 (IQR: 5-10).
CONCLUSIONS: At least half of the participants considered polypharmacy (≥10 
medications) inevitable for an optimal basic treatment of DM, COPD and HF. The 
heterogeneity of responses raises issues when considering quality indicators in 
population-based studies.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sapharm.2018.09.008
PMID: 30249377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Nov 13;10:2485-94. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S87464. eCollection 2015.

Categorization of COPD patients in Turkey via GOLD 2013 strategy document: 
ALPHABET study.

Gunen H(1), Yilmaz M(2), Aktas O(1), Ergun P(3), Ortakoylu MG(4), Demir A(5), 
Cetinkaya P(6), Gurgun A(7), Otlu M(8), Cilli A(9), Yilmaz U(5), Kokturk N(10), 
Candemir I(3), Yakar HI(1), Ar I(11), Konya A(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Sureyyapasa Chest Diseases and Thoracic Surgery 
Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Chest Diseases, Safranbolu State Hospital, Karabuk, Turkey.
(3)Department of Chest Diseases, Ataturk Chest Diseases and Thoracic Surgery 
Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Chest Diseases, Yedikule Chest Diseases and Thoracic Surgery 
Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Chest Diseases, Dr Suat Seren Chest Diseases and Thoracic 
Surgery Training and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(6)Department of Chest Diseases, Cukurova Dr Askim Tufekci State Hospital, 
Adana, Turkey.
(7)Department of Chest Diseases, Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, 
Turkey.
(8)Department of Chest Diseases, Bingol State Hospital, Bingol, Turkey.
(9)Department of Chest Diseases, Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, 
Antalya, Turkey.
(10)Department of Chest Diseases, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(11)Medical Department, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: To determine distribution of COPD assessment categories and 
physicians' adherence to Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) 2013 strategy in Turkish COPD patients.
METHODS: A total of 1,610 COPD patients (mean [standard deviation] age: 62.6 
[9.9] years, 85.7% were males) were included in this multicenter, 
non-interventional, cross-sectional study. Patients were categorized via GOLD 
2013 strategy document. Consistency between reported and re-classified GOLD 
categories, and measures used for symptom evaluation and exacerbation was 
analyzed.
RESULTS: Overall, 41.1% of patients were assigned to GOLD A, while 13.2% were 
assigned to GOLD C categories. Long-acting beta-2 agonist + long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist + inhaled corticosteroid regimen was the most common 
treatment (62.0%). Over-treatment was noted in >70% of GOLD A, B, and C 
patients. A high consistency between measures of symptom evaluation (Kappa 
coefficient =0.993, P<0.0001) and a low-moderate consistency between 
exacerbation risk measures (Kappa coefficient =0.237, P<0.0001) were noted.
CONCLUSION: Our findings revealed GOLD A as the most prevalent category in 
Turkish cohort of COPD patients. Group assignment was altered depending on the 
chosen measure for symptom and risk assessment. Physician non-adherence to 
treatment recommendations in GOLD 2013 document leading to over-treatment in 
patients assigned to GOLD A, B, and C categories was also detected.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S87464
PMCID: PMC4654531
PMID: 26622176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Drug Ther Bull. 2017 Dec;55(12):138-141. doi: 10.1136/dtb.2017.12.0562.

Single inhaler triple therapy for COPD.

[No authors listed]

The European Medicines Agency (EMA) has granted marketing authorisation for a 
pressurised metered dose inhaler (pMDI) containing beclometasone dipropionate, 
formoterol fumarate dihydrate and glycopyrronium bromide (Trimbow - Chiesi 
Pharmaceuticals) for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) in patients not adequately treated with a combination of an inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) and a long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA).1-3 The manufacturer 
claims that this is a significant treatment advance for COPD patients, and that 
the use of one inhaler should simplify therapy and, therefore, may improve 
adherence.1 Here, we consider the evidence for this product for the management 
of patients with moderate to severe COPD, and how it fits with current 
management strategies.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/dtb.2017.12.0562
PMID: 29237699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2018 Apr;49:46-53. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.01.003. Epub 
2018 Jan 12.

Comparison of the in vitro pharmacological profiles of long acting muscarinic 
antagonists in human bronchus.

Naline E(1), Grassin Delyle S(2), Salvator H(3), Brollo M(4), Faisy C(5), 
Victoni T(6), Abrial C(7), Devillier P(8).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Research in Respiratory Pharmacology-UPRES EA220, UFR Sciences 
de la Santé Simone Veil, Université Versailles Saint-Quentin, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Suresnes, France; Department of Airway Diseases, Hôpital Foch, 
Suresnes, France. Electronic address: upresea220@orange.fr.
(2)Department of Airway Diseases, Hôpital Foch, Suresnes, France; Mass 
Spectrometry Platform & INSERM UMR1173, UFR Sciences de la Santé Simone Veil, 
Université Versailles Saint Quentin en Yvelines, Université Paris Saclay, 
Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France. Electronic address: 
s.grassindelyle@hopital-foch.org.
(3)Laboratory of Research in Respiratory Pharmacology-UPRES EA220, UFR Sciences 
de la Santé Simone Veil, Université Versailles Saint-Quentin, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Suresnes, France; Department of Airway Diseases, Hôpital Foch, 
Suresnes, France. Electronic address: h.salvator@hopital-foch.org.
(4)Laboratory of Research in Respiratory Pharmacology-UPRES EA220, UFR Sciences 
de la Santé Simone Veil, Université Versailles Saint-Quentin, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Suresnes, France. Electronic address: m.brollo@hopital-foch.org.
(5)Laboratory of Research in Respiratory Pharmacology-UPRES EA220, UFR Sciences 
de la Santé Simone Veil, Université Versailles Saint-Quentin, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Suresnes, France. Electronic address: christophe.faisy@wanadoo.fr.
(6)Laboratory of Research in Respiratory Pharmacology-UPRES EA220, UFR Sciences 
de la Santé Simone Veil, Université Versailles Saint-Quentin, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Suresnes, France; Laboratory of Histocompatibility and 
Cryopresevation, Laboratory of Tissue Repair, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Electronic 
address: tatianavictoni@hotmail.com.
(7)Laboratory of Research in Respiratory Pharmacology-UPRES EA220, UFR Sciences 
de la Santé Simone Veil, Université Versailles Saint-Quentin, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Suresnes, France. Electronic address: abrial.charlotte@gmail.com.
(8)Laboratory of Research in Respiratory Pharmacology-UPRES EA220, UFR Sciences 
de la Santé Simone Veil, Université Versailles Saint-Quentin, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Suresnes, France; Department of Airway Diseases, Hôpital Foch, 
Suresnes, France. Electronic address: p.devillier@hopital-foch.org.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) have been 
recommended for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and (more 
recently) asthma. However, the in vitro pharmacological profiles of the four 
LAMAs currently marketed (tiotropium, umeclidinium, aclidinium and 
glycopyrronium) have not yet been compared (relative to ipratropium) by using 
the same experimental approach.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: With a total of 560 human bronchial rings, we 
investigated the antagonists' potency, onset and duration of action for 
inhibition of the contractile response evoked by electrical field stimulation. 
We also evaluated the antagonists' potency for inhibiting cumulative 
concentration-contraction curves for acetylcholine and carbachol.
KEY RESULTS: The onset and duration of action were concentration-dependent. At 
submaximal, equipotent concentrations, the antagonists' onsets of action were 
within the same order of magnitude. However, the durations of action differed 
markedly. After washout, ipratropium's inhibitory activity decreased rapidly 
(within 30-90 min) but those of tiotropium and umeclidinium remained stable (at 
above 70%) for at least 9 h. Aclidinium and glycopyrronium displayed less stable 
inhibitory effects, with a progressive loss of inhibition at submaximal 
concentrations. In contrast to ipratropium, all the LAMAs behaved as 
insurmountable antagonists by decreasing the maximum responses to both 
acetylcholine and carbachol.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The observed differences in the LAMAs' in vitro 
pharmacological profiles in the human bronchus provide a compelling 
pharmacological rationale for the differences in the drugs' respective 
recommended daily doses and frequencies of administration.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.01.003
PMID: 29337266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jun 28;14:1377-1388. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S194856. eCollection 2019.

Patient-reported outcomes of dual bronchodilator fixed-dose combination versus 
bronchodilator monotherapy in individuals with COPD.

Strange C(1), Walker V(2), DePietro M(3), Tong J(2), Kurlander J(2), Carlyle 
M(2), Millette LA(3), Wittbrodt E(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(2)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum, Inc., Eden Prairie, MN, USA.
(3)US Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(4)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, AstraZeneca, Wilmington, DE, USA.

Background: This study compared real-world patient-reported outcomes (PROs) 
measured by the Clinical COPD Questionnaire (CCQ), the London Chest Activities 
of Daily Living (LCADL) scale, and the Work Productivity and Activity Impairment 
(WPAI) questionnaire between individuals with COPD initiating LAMA/LABA 
fixed-dose combination (FDC) dual therapy versus either long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) or long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA) monotherapy. Methods: 
Individuals with COPD aged ≥40 years initiating a LAMA/LABA FDC dual therapy or 
a LAMA or LABA monotherapy (index date = first prescription date) between 
January 1, 2016 and December 31, 2016 were identified from a large US 
administrative claims database. Individuals were excluded if they were 
prescribed an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) or ICS/LABA two months prior to the 
index date or were diagnosed with cystic fibrosis, idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis, or asthma. The cohorts were propensity score matched (PSM) 1:1 for 
COPD severity using baseline measures. Each participant completed a survey. 
Results: Surveys were completed by 399 participants in the dual therapy cohort, 
and 718 participants in the monotherapy cohort. Following PSM, 379 participants 
remained in each cohort for analysis (monotherapy: 369 LAMA and 10 LABA). The 
dual therapy cohort reported fewer COPD-related symptoms (CCQ symptom score 2.75 
vs 2.97, respectively, P=0.023), and, fewer limitations in leisure activities 
(LCADL leisure score 4.78 vs 5.17, respectively, P=0.021) versus the monotherapy 
cohort. No significant differences were found in the WPAI. A greater percentage 
of participants in the dual therapy cohort stayed on index therapy (63.1%) when 
compared with the monotherapy cohort (30.3%, P<0.0001). Conclusions: Only 30% of 
the participants prescribed monotherapy, usually with a LAMA, remained on index 
therapy alone at the time of survey administration. In the dual therapy cohort, 
63% of the participants remained on the index medication and had fewer 
COPD-related symptoms and fewer limitations in leisure activities compared with 
participants in the monotherapy cohort.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S194856
PMCID: PMC6612016
PMID: 31303751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Charlie Strange reports personal fees and 
non-financial support from AstraZeneca, CSA Medical, Glaxo Smith Kline, BTG, 
grants, personal fees, non-financial support from Pulmonx, personal fees from 
Uptake Medical, and grants from MatRx, all in COPD outside the submitted work. 
Ms Maureen Carlyle, Mr Jonathan Kurlander, Dr Junliang Tong, and Ms Valery 
Walker report support from AstraZeneca during the time that this study was 
conducted. Dr Eric Wittbrodt reports that he is an employee of AstraZeneca. Dr 
Michael DePietro reports that he was an employee of AstraZeneca during the time 
that this study was conducted and is currently an employee of Teva 
Pharmaceuticals. Dr Lauren A Millette reports that she was an employee of 
AstraZeneca during the time that this study was conducted and is currently an 
employee of Genentech. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


344. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2015;8(5):529-39. doi: 10.1586/17512433.2015.1075389.

Olodaterol + tiotropium bromide for the treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Rogliani P, Ora J, Matera MG.

Author information:
(1)a 1 Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Chair of 
Respiratory Medicine, Rome, Italy.

A solid scientific rationale and an increasing body of clinical evidence for 
combining a beta-agonist with an antimuscarinic agent in COPD fully support the 
opinion that patients not controlled by a single bronchodilator should be given 
two bronchodilators with different mechanisms of action. Tiotropium is an 
established choice for the management of patients with stable COPD, and 
olodaterol is a new effective and safe once-daily long-acting beta-agonist. The 
parallel bronchodilating modes of action of olodaterol and tiotropium make them 
an attractive combination in COPD. The large ongoing TOviTO Phase III trial 
program is documenting the efficacy and safety of olodaterol/tiotropium fixed 
dose combination delivered via the Respimat Soft Mist Inhaler as maintenance 
therapy in patients with moderate to very severe COPD. However, we must still 
know whether this fixed-dose combination will affect exacerbations and 
hospitalizations, and ultimately death, and also the precise estimates of its 
relative cardiovascular safety.

DOI: 10.1586/17512433.2015.1075389
PMID: 26294073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Jun 28;11:1425-34. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S106127. eCollection 2016.

Early bronchodilator action of glycopyrronium versus tiotropium in 
moderate-to-severe COPD patients: a cross-over blinded randomized study 
(Symptoms and Pulmonary function in the moRnING).

Marin JM(1), Beeh KM(2), Clemens A(3), Castellani W(4), Schaper L(5), Saralaya 
D(6), Gunstone A(7), Casamor R(8), Kostikas K(3), Aalamian-Mattheis M(3).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Miguel Servet, IISAragón, CIBERES, Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Insaf Respiratory Research Institute, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(3)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Hospital Piero Palagi, Fiorenze, Italy.
(5)Research Institute and Practice, Berlin-Brandenburg, Germany.
(6)Bradford Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Bradford, UK.
(7)Staploe Medical Center, Soham, Cambridge, UK.
(8)Novartis Farmaceutica SA, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Morning symptoms associated with COPD have a negative impact on 
patients' quality of life. Long-acting bronchodilators with rapid onset may 
relieve patients' symptoms. In the Symptoms and Pulmonary function in the 
moRnING study, we prospectively compared the rapid onset bronchodilator profile 
of glycopyrronium (GLY) and tiotropium (TIO) during the first few hours after 
dosing in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: Patients were randomized (1:1) to receive either once-daily GLY (50 μg) 
or TIO (18 μg) and corresponding placebos in a cross-over design for 28 days. 
The primary objective was to demonstrate the superiority of GLY versus TIO in 
area under the curve from 0 to 4 hours (AUC0-4h) forced expiratory volume in 1 
second (FEV1) after the first dose. The secondary objective was to compare GLY 
versus TIO using the patient reported outcomes Morning COPD Symptoms 
Questionnaire 3 hours post-inhalation.
RESULTS: One-hundred and twenty-six patients were randomized (male 70.2%; mean 
age 65.7 years) and 108 patients completed the study. On Day 1, GLY resulted in 
significantly higher FEV1 AUC0-4h after the first dose versus TIO (treatment 
difference [Δ], 0.030 L, 95% confidence interval 0.004-0.056, P=0.025). 
Improvements in morning COPD symptoms from baseline at Days 1 and 28 were 
similar between GLY and TIO. Post hoc analysis of the FEV1 AUC0-4h by time point 
on Day 1 showed significant improvements in patients receiving GLY versus TIO at 
5 minutes (Δ=0.029 L, P=0.015), 15 minutes (Δ=0.033 L, P=0.026), and 1 hour 
(Δ=0.044 L, P=0.014). Safety results were comparable between both treatments.
CONCLUSION: The SPRING study demonstrates the superiority of GLY versus TIO in 
terms of superior bronchodilation in the first 4 hours after administration, 
thus extending the clinical data that support a faster onset of action of GLY 
versus TIO.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S106127
PMCID: PMC4934556
PMID: 27418815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 9;10(7):e0130102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130102. 
eCollection 2015.

Inhaled Pharmacotherapy and Stroke Risk in Patients with Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease: A Nationwide Population Based Study Using Two-Stage Approach.

Lin HW(1), Chung CL(2), Lin YS(3), Yu CM(4), Lee CN(5), Bien MY(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Soochow University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)School of Respiratory Therapy, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)School of Respiratory Therapy, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Shuang Ho 
Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)School of Respiratory Therapy, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Division 
of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Wan Fang Hospital, 
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) are at higher risk of stroke than those without COPD. This study aims to 
explore the impact of inhaled pharmacotherapy on stroke risk in COPD patients 
during a three-year follow-up, using a nationwide, population-based study and a 
matched cohort design.
METHODS: The study cohort comprised 10,413 patients who had received COPD 
treatment between 2004 and 2006; 41,652 randomly selected subjects comprised the 
comparison cohort. Cox proportional hazard regressions and two-stage propensity 
score calibration were performed to determine the impact of various inhaled 
therapies including short-acting muscarinic antagonists, long acting muscarinic 
antagonists, short-acting β-agonists (SABAs), long-acting β-agonists (LABAs), 
and LABA plus inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), on the risk after adjustment for 
patient demographic characteristics and comorbid disorders.
RESULTS: Of the 52,065 sampled patients, 2,689 (5.2%) developed stroke during 
follow-up, including 727 (7.0%) from the COPD cohort and 1,962 (4.7%) from the 
comparison cohort (p < 0.001). Treatment with SABA was associated with 1.67-fold 
(95% CI 1.45-1.91; p < 0.001) increased risk of stroke in COPD patients. By 
contrast, the cumulative incidence of stroke was significantly lower in those 
treated with LABA plus ICS than those treated without (adjusted hazard ratio 
0.75, 95% CI 0.60-0.94, p = 0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: Among COPD patients, the use of inhaled SABA is associated with an 
increased risk of stroke, and combination treatment with inhaled LABA and ICS 
relates to a risk reduction. Further prospective research is needed to verify 
whether LABA plus ICS confers protection against stroke in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130102
PMCID: PMC4497597
PMID: 26158649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


347. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2017 Jan;26(1):35-49. doi: 
10.1080/13543784.2017.1264388. Epub 2016 Dec 7.

Muscarinic antagonists in early stage clinical development for the treatment of 
asthma.

Albertson TE(1)(2)(3), Chenoweth JA(2)(3), Adams JY(1), Sutter ME(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and 
Sleep Medicine , School of Medicine, U.C. Davis , Sacramento , CA , USA.
(2)b Department of Emergency Medicine , School of Medicine U. C. Davis , 
Sacramento , CA , USA.
(3)c Department of Medicine , Veterans Administration Northern California Health 
Care System , Mather , CA , USA.

Parasympathetic neurons utilize the neurotransmitter acetylcholine to modulate 
and constrict airway smooth muscles at the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. 
Inhaled agents that antagonize the muscarinic (M) acetylcholine receptor, 
particularly airway M3 receptors, have increasing data supporting use in 
persistent asthma. Areas covered: Use of inhaled long acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMA) in asthma is explored. The LAMA tiotropium is approved for 
maintenance in symptomatic asthma patients despite the use of inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS), leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA) and/or 
long-acting beta2 agonists (LABA). LAMA agents currently approved for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) include tiotropium, 
glycopyrrolate/glycopyrronium, umeclidinium and aclidinium. These agents are 
reviewed for their pharmacological differences and clinical trials in asthma. 
Expert opinion: Current guidelines place inhaled LAMAs as adjunctive maintenance 
therapy in symptomatic asthma not controlled by an ICS and/or a LTRA. LAMA 
agents will play an increasing role in moderate to severe symptomatic asthma 
patients. Additional LAMA agents are likely to seek a maintenance indication 
perhaps as a combined inhaler with an ICS or with an ICS and a LABA. These 
fixed-dose combination inhalers are being tested in COPD and asthma patients. 
Once-a-day dosing of inhaled LAMA agents in severe asthma patients will likely 
become the future standard.

DOI: 10.1080/13543784.2017.1264388
PMID: 27927039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Vnitr Lek. 2016 Winter;62(12):1011-1020.

[Current position of new fixed-dose combination of tiotropium and olodaterol - 
its role in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in the Czech 
Republic].

[Article in Czech]

Koblížek V, Svoboda M.

COPD is a serious pulmonary disease with rising global socioeconomic impact. 
From the perspective of the Czech Republic COPD was responsible for 21 000 acute 
hospitalizations and 3 500 deaths, mortality reaches 33/100 000 in 2015. Early 
stages of disease may be associated with a significant reduction of exercise 
capacity and the reduction of activities of daily living. Moreover early stages 
of bronchial obstruction are associated with the fastest lung function decline. 
Finally, early elimination of the risk of inhalation exposure is able to 
influence the course of the disease and to reduce its mortality. Most current 
treatment strategies and national recommendations attributed central role to 
bronchodilator drugs. Long-acting bronchodilators (LAMA and LABA) creates an 
essential component of the treatment of symptomatic individuals in the Czech 
COPD guidelines as well. Actual version of this document constitutes as standard 
therapy: long-lasting inhaled bronchodilators, targeted efforts to eliminate 
inhalation risk, vaccination, regular exercise, repeated inhalation technique 
training, identification, and treatment of relevant comorbidities. All other 
drugs (inhaled-corticosteroids, mucoactive medication, roflumilast, 
antibiotics), and non-pharmacological (lung volume reductions, nutrition 
support, long-term oxygen, home non-invasive ventilation, lung transplantation, 
palliative care) procedures are intended for a specific subgroups of patients 
only. The newest type of bronchodilator therapy is represented by a fixed dual 
bronchodilation. Currently we can use four original drug combinations: titropium 
+ olodaterol, glycopyrronium + indacaterol, umeklidinium + vilanterol and 
aclidinium + formoterol in the Czech Republic. This area is an enterprising 
research. For example comprehensive scientific program covering eight studies on 
15 000 COPD patients (TOviTO) assess the therapeutic benefits of tiotropium + 
olodaterolu in terms of lung function, quality of life, exercise tolerance, 
daily physical activity and the incidence of acute exacerbations. Meanwhile the 
published results of analyzed studies TONADO, OTEMTO, VIVACITO, and the first 
results of the study DYNAGITO have showed that fixed dual bronchodilation should 
be a mandatory treatment to all the symptomatic COPD patients. Unfortunately 
"face to face" comparison of different drug combinations is still missing. 
However, the treatment with tiotropium + olodaterol combination has been 
demonstrated to significantly (35 %) reduce the occurrence of clinically 
significant deterioration, which may lead to the stabilization of this 
multicomponent disease.Key words: COPD - hospitalizations - inhaled 
bronchodilators - mortality - treatment.

PMID: 28139131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jun 6;14:1251-1265. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S191845. eCollection 2019.

Evidence-based review of data on the combination inhaler umeclidinium/vilanterol 
in patients with COPD.

Albertson TE(1)(2), Bowman WS(1)(2), Harper RW(1)(2), Godbout RM(2)(3), Murin 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and 
Sleep Medicine, UC Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs, Northern California Health Care System, 
Mather, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of General Medicine, UC Davis, 
Sacramento, CA, USA.

The use of inhaled, fixed-dose, long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) 
combined with long-acting, beta2-adrenergic receptor agonists (LABA) has become 
a mainstay in the maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). One of the fixed-dose LAMA/LABA combinations is the dry powder inhaler 
(DPI) of umeclidinium bromide (UMEC) and vilanterol trifenatate (VI) (62.5 µg/25 
µg) approved for once-a-day maintenance treatment of COPD. This paper reviews 
the use of fixed-dose combination LAMA/LABA agents focusing on the UMEC/VI DPI 
inhaler in the maintenance treatment of COPD. The fixed-dose combination 
LAMA/LABA inhaler offers a step beyond a single inhaled maintenance agent but is 
still a single device for the COPD patient having frequent COPD exacerbations 
and persistent symptoms not well controlled on one agent. Currently available 
clinical trials suggest that the once-a-day DPI of UMEC/VI is well-tolerated, 
safe and non-inferior or better than other currently available inhaled 
fixed-dose LAMA/LABA combinations for COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S191845
PMCID: PMC6559138
PMID: 31239659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


350. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 May 4;12:1325-1337. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S133307. eCollection 2017.

The effect of indacaterol/glycopyrronium versus tiotropium or 
salmeterol/fluticasone on the prevention of clinically important deterioration 
in COPD.

Anzueto AR(1)(2), Vogelmeier CF(3), Kostikas K(4), Mezzi K(4), Fucile S(5), 
Bader G(4), Shen S(5), Banerji D(5), Fogel R(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center.
(2)South Texas Veterans Healthcare System, University of Texas, San Antonio, TX, 
United States.
(3)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, 
Germany.
(4)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, United States.

BACKGROUND: Endpoints that evaluate deterioration rather than improvement of 
disease may have clinical utility in COPD. In this analysis, we compared the 
effects of different maintenance treatments on the prevention of clinically 
important deterioration (CID) in moderate-to-severe COPD patients.
METHODS: Data were analyzed from three 26-week studies comparing 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) with tiotropium (TIO) or 
salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC). Two definitions of CID were used; each was a 
composite of three outcome measures typically associated with COPD. Definition 1 
(D1) comprised a ≥100 mL decrease in forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
(FEV1), a ≥4-unit increase in St George's Respiratory Questionnaire, and a 
moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbation. In Definition 2 (D2), a ≥1-unit decrease 
in transition dyspnea index replaced FEV1.
RESULTS: Using D1, IND/GLY significantly reduced the risk of first or sustained 
CID versus either TIO (hazard ratio 0.72 [0.61, 0.86], P=0.0003 and 0.73 [0.61, 
0.89], P=0.001) or SFC (0.67 [0.57, 0.80] and 0.63 [0.52, 0.77], both P<0.0001). 
With D2, IND/GLY significantly reduced the risk of first, but not sustained, CID 
versus TIO (0.80 [0.64 to 0.99], P=0.0359 and 0.85 [0.66, 1.10], P=0.2208) and 
both first and sustained CID versus SFC (0.73 [0.61, 0.88], P=0.001 and 0.72 
[0.58, 0.90], P=0.0036).
CONCLUSION: These data confirm the utility of the CID endpoint as a means of 
monitoring COPD worsening in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. Using the 
CID measure, we demonstrated that dual bronchodilation with IND/GLY 
significantly reduced the risk of CID versus either long acting muscarinic 
antagonist or long-acting beta-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid treatment, providing 
further evidence for the benefit of dual bronchodilation in this patient 
population.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S133307
PMCID: PMC5422319
PMID: 28496316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors take full responsibility 
for the scope, direction, content, and editorial decisions relating to the 
manuscript, and were involved at all stages of development and approved the 
submitted manuscript. The authors received no compensation related to the 
development of the manuscript. ARA has acted as a consultant and served on 
advisory boards for Novartis Pharma AG, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, 
and Sunovion. CFV has acted as a consultant and served on advisory boards for 
Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi; received grants and 
personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, grants and personal fees from Grifols, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Takeda, Cipla, and Berlin Chemie/Menarini. KK is an 
employee and shareholder of Novartis Pharma AG. Previously he has received 
honoraria for educational activities and lectures from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, ELPEN, GSK, Novartis, and Takeda, and has participated on 
advisory boards arranged by AstraZeneca, Chiesi, ELPEN, Novartis, and Takeda. 
KM, SF, GB, SS, DB and RF are employees and shareholders of Novartis Pharma AG 
or Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. The authors have no other conflicts of 
interest to report in this work.


351. Respir Res. 2019 Aug 20;20(1):189. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1156-1.

Are there specific clinical characteristics associated with physician's 
treatment choices in COPD?

Roche N(1)(2), Antoniadis A(3), Hess D(4), Li PZ(5), Kelkel E(6), Leroy S(7)(8), 
Pison C(9), Burgel PR(10), Aguilaniu B(11); COLIBRI COPD Research Group.

Author information:
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Centre, Hôpital Cochin, 
AP-HP and Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75014, Paris, France. 
nicolas.roche@aphp.fr.
(2)Pneumologie et Soins Intensifs Respiratoires, Hôpital Cochin, 27, rue du Fbg 
St Jacques, 75014, Paris, France. nicolas.roche@aphp.fr.
(3)Laboratoire LJK, Département de statistiques, Université Grenoble Alpes, 
Grenoble, France.
(4)Programme Colibri-Pneumo, ACCPP (Association pour la Complémentarité des 
Connaissances et des Pratiques de la Pneumologie), Grenoble, France.
(5)Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit, Montreal Chest 
Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
(6)Service de pneumologie, Pôle médecines spécialisées et cancérologie, Centre 
hospitalier général, Chambéry, France.
(7)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Oncology, CHU de Nice, University 
Hospital Federation OncoAge, Nice, France.
(8)CNRS UMR 7275 - Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 
Université de Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France.
(9)Service Hospitalier Universitaire Pneumologie Physiologie, Pôle Thorax et 
Vaisseaux, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Grenoble Alpes, Inserm 1055, 
Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.
(10)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Centre, Hôpital 
Cochin, AP-HP and Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75014, Paris, 
France.
(11)Université Grenoble Alpes and Programme Colibri-Pneumo (aCCPP), Grenoble, 
France.

BACKGROUND: The number of pharmacological agents and guidelines available for 
COPD has increased markedly but guidelines remain poorly followed. Understanding 
underlying clinical reasoning is challenging and could be informed by clinical 
characteristics associated with treatment prescriptions.
METHODS: To determine whether COPD treatment choices by respiratory physicians 
correspond to specific patients' features, this study was performed in 1171 
patients who had complete treatment and clinical characterisation data. Multiple 
statistical models were applied to explain five treatment categories: A: no COPD 
treatment or short-acting bronchodilator(s) only; B: one long-acting 
bronchodilator (beta2 agonist, LABA or anticholinergic agent, LAMA); C: 
LABA+LAMA; D: a LABA or LAMA + inhaled corticosteroid (ICS); E: triple therapy 
(LABA+LAMA+ICS).
RESULTS: Mean FEV1 was 60% predicted. Triple therapy was prescribed to 32.9% 
(treatment category E) of patients and 29.8% received a combination of two 
treatments (treatment categories C or D); ICS-containing regimen were present 
for 44% of patients altogether. Single or dual bronchodilation were less 
frequently used (treatment categories B and C: 19% each). While lung function 
was associated with all treatment decisions, exacerbation history, scores of 
clinical impact and gender were associated with the prescription of > 1 
maintenance treatment. Statistical models could predict treatment decisions with 
a < 35% error rate.
CONCLUSION: In COPD, contrary to what has been previously reported in some 
studies, treatment choices by respiratory physicians appear rather rational 
since they can be largely explained by the patients' characteristics proposed to 
guide them in most recommendations.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1156-1
PMCID: PMC6701115
PMID: 31429756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NR reports grants and personal fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Pfizer and personal fees from Teva, GSK, 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Mundipharma, Cipla, Sanofi, Sandoz, 3 M, Zambon. PRB 
reports personal fees from Astra-Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim France, Chiesi, 
GSK, Novartis, Pfizer, Vertex, Zambon, Teva. CP reports grants and personal fees 
from GSK France, personal fees from Novartis France, BIF and AZ France. AA, BA, 
EK, SL have nothing to disclose. DH is employed by Association pour la 
Complémentarité des Connaissances et des Pratiques de la Pneumologie, Grenoble 
using funds from Agir à Dom, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, 
Novartis, PneumRx.


352. Respir Med. 2017 Oct;131:148-157. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.08.013. Epub 2017 Aug 
14.

The effect of umeclidinium on lung function and symptoms in patients with fixed 
airflow obstruction and reversibility to salbutamol: A randomised, 3-phase 
study.

Lee L(1), Kerwin E(2), Collison K(3), Nelsen L(4), Wu W(5), Yang S(6), Pascoe 
S(3).

Author information:
(1)GSK, Gunnels Wood Rd, Stevenage, Hertfordshire SG1 2NY, UK. Electronic 
address: laurie.a.lee@gsk.com.
(2)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, 3860 Crater Lake Ave, 
Medford, OR 97504, USA.
(3)GSK, 5 Moore Dr, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
(4)GSK, 1250 S Collegeville Rd, Collegeville, PA 19426, USA.
(5)Biostatistics, PAREXEL International, 2520 Meridian Pkwy #200, Durham, NC 
27713, USA.
(6)GSK, Stockley Park West, Uxbridge, Middlesex UB11 1BT, UK.

INTRODUCTION: The long acting muscarinic antagonist, umeclidinium (UMEC), 
combined with the inhaled corticosteroid, fluticasone furoate (FF), improves 
lung function in symptomatic patients with asthma. We assessed FF/UMEC in 
patients with a primary diagnosis of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), but physiological characteristics of both (fixed airflow 
obstruction and reversibility to salbutamol).
METHODS: This double-blind, parallel-arm, 3-phase study randomised 338 patients 
(1:1:1:1:2:2) to FF 100 mcg alone or combined with UMEC (15.6, 62.5, 125, or 250 
mcg) or vilanterol 25 mcg (Phase A, 4 weeks). Primary endpoint: change from 
baseline in clinic trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) (end of Phase 
A). Secondary endpoints: morning peak expiratory flow (PEF), rescue medication 
use and Evaluating Respiratory Symptoms in COPD (E-RS™: COPD) scores. Safety was 
assessed.
RESULTS: In the intent-to-treat population, the increase in trough FEV1 over FF 
was significant for FF/UMEC 62.5 (0.140 L [p = 0.019]) and 125 mcg (0.120 L 
[p = 0.039]), with similar changes for patients with a primary diagnosis of 
asthma or COPD. Changes from baseline in morning PEF and E-RS total score were 
greater for all FF/UMEC doses vs FF (p ≤ 0.05). Change from baseline in rescue 
medication use was statistically or clinically significant for all FF/UMEC doses 
vs FF. The incidence of on-treatment adverse events was 15%-32% (Phase A), with 
no dose-related effects.
CONCLUSIONS: FF/UMEC 62.5 mcg produced clinically meaningful improvements in 
FEV1, morning PEF, E-RS total score and rescue medication use. FF/UMEC may 
benefit patients with features of both asthma and COPD. CLINICALTRIALS.GOV: 
NCT02164539; GSK: 200699.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.08.013
PMID: 28947022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jun 15;10:1123-8. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S83205. eCollection 2015.

Roflumilast, a phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor, induces phagocytic activity in 
Greek COPD patients.

Porpodis K(1), Domvri K(1), Zarogoulidis P(1), Petridis D(2), Tsirgogianni K(1), 
Papaioannou A(1), Hatzizisi O(3), Kioumis I(1), Liaka A(3), Kikidaki V(3), 
Lampaki S(1), Organtzis J(1), Zarogoulidis K(1).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Department-Oncology Unit, G Papanikolaou General Hospital, 
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Department of Food Technology, School of Food Technology and Nutrition, 
Alexander Technological Educational Institute, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Pulmonary Department, Immunology and Histocompatibility Laboratory, G 
Papanikolaou General Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
Thessaloniki, Greece.

Comment in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015;10:1931-4.

BACKGROUND: A new approach to the treatment of COPD includes controlling 
inflammation because of its important role in exacerbation of the disease. 
Recently, roflumilast has been added as a therapeutic option for COPD. 
Roflumilast is an oral phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor that targets inflammatory 
cells involved in triggering exacerbations of COPD. The objective of the current 
study was to evaluate roflumilast for its contribution to phagocytic activity in 
COPD patients.
METHODS: Twenty-one patients diagnosed with COPD received roflumilast once daily 
for 6 months in combination with fluticasone (an inhaled corticosteroid), 
salmeterol (a long-acting beta-agonist), and tiotropium (a long acting muscarinic 
antagonist) or combinations of these agents. The main inclusion criterion was 
stable disease for at least the previous 30 days. Neutrophils and spirometric 
changes, ie, forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and forced vital 
capacity (FVC), were measured in the COPD patients at indicated time points. The 
first sample was taken before receiving roflumilast, the second 3 months later, 
and the third after 6 months. Examination of defective phagocytosis was done by 
flow cytometry using a FagoFlowEx(®) kit. The statistical analysis was performed 
using Statistica software.
RESULTS: Our results indicate that phagocytic activity was increased after 3 and 
6 months of treatment when compared with baseline (P<0.001). Similarly, FVC and 
FEV1 were also increased during the 6-month period, but only FVC differed 
significantly from baseline (P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Although the number of patients in this study was limited, our 
results indicate that roflumilast induces phagocytic activity, which improves 
lung function.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S83205
PMCID: PMC4474389
PMID: 26109853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Feb 24;12:745-755. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S119032. eCollection 2017.

Umeclidinium/vilanterol as step-up therapy from tiotropium in patients with 
moderate COPD: a randomized, parallel-group, 12-week study.

Kerwin EM(1), Kalberg CJ(2), Galkin DV(2), Zhu CQ(3), Church A(2), Riley JH(4), 
Fahy WA(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, OR.
(2)Respiratory Department, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)Clinical Statistics, GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex.
(4)Respiratory Department, GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex, 
UK.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with COPD who remain symptomatic on long-acting 
bronchodilator monotherapy may benefit from step-up therapy to a long-acting 
bronchodilator combination. This study evaluated the efficacy and safety of 
umeclidinium (UMEC)/vilanterol (VI) in patients with moderate COPD who remained 
symptomatic on tiotropium (TIO).
METHODS: In this randomized, blinded, double-dummy, parallel-group study 
(NCT01899742), patients (N=494) who were prescribed TIO for ≥3 months at 
screening (forced expiratory volume in 1 s [FEV1]: 50%-70% of predicted; 
modified Medical Research Council [mMRC] score ≥1) and completed a 4-week run-in 
with TIO were randomized to UMEC/VI 62.5/25 µg or TIO 18 µg for 12 weeks. 
Efficacy assessments included trough FEV1 at Day 85 (primary end point), 0-3 h 
serial FEV1, rescue medication use, Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI), St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), and COPD Assessment Test (CAT). Safety 
evaluations included adverse events (AEs).
RESULTS: Compared with TIO, UMEC/VI produced greater improvements in trough FEV1 
(least squares [LS] mean difference: 88 mL at Day 85 [95% confidence interval 
{CI}: 45-131]; P<0.001) and FEV1 after 5 min on Day 1 (50 mL [95% CI: 27-72]; 
P<0.001). Reductions in rescue medication use over 12 weeks were greater with 
UMEC/VI versus TIO (LS mean change: -0.1 puffs/d [95% CI: -0.2-0.0]; P≤0.05). 
More patients achieved clinically meaningful improvements in TDI score (≥1 unit) 
with UMEC/VI (63%) versus TIO (49%; odds ratio at Day 84=1.78 [95% CI: 
1.21-2.64]; P≤0.01). Improvements in SGRQ and CAT scores were similar between 
treatments. The incidence of AEs was similar with UMEC/VI (30%) and TIO (31%).
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI step-up therapy provides clinical benefit over TIO 
monotherapy in patients with moderate COPD who are symptomatic on TIO alone.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S119032
PMCID: PMC5338844
PMID: 28280319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure EMK has served on advisory boards, 
speaker panels, and received travel reimbursement from Amphastar, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Forest, Ironwood, Mylan, Novartis, Pearl, Sunovion, 
Targacept, Teva, and Theravance; has conducted multicenter clinical research 
trials for ~40 pharmaceutical companies. CJK, DVG, C-QZ, AC, JHR, and WAF are 
employees of GSK and hold stocks/shares in GSK. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


355. Respiration. 2018;95 Suppl 1:22-29. doi: 10.1159/000487182. Epub 2018 Apr 27.

Combination Therapy of Inhaled Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium for Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in the Very Elderly: Is It Safe? An 
Electrocardiographic Evaluation.

Spannella F(1)(2), Giulietti F(1)(2), Cesari V(1)(2), Francioso A(1)(2), Cocci 
G(1)(2), Landi L(1)(2), Lombardi FE(1)(2), Borioni E(1)(2), Bernardi B(1)(2), 
Rosettani G(1)(2), Bordoni V(1)(2), Iacoacci C(1), Giordano P(1), Sarzani 
R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, IRCCS-INRCA "U. Sestilli", Ancona, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Molecular Sciences, University "Politecnica delle 
Marche", Ancona, Italy.

Cardiovascular (CV) comorbidities in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) are associated with increased morbidity and mortality, especially 
in old and very old subjects. The question if long-acting beta-agonist and 
long acting muscarinic antagonist could be associated with the increased 
prevalence of CV-related adverse effects has puzzled, particularly in the past, 
specialists involved in the management of respiratory diseases. The safety of 
these compounds has scarcely been tested in patients aged ≥ 65 years with CV 
comorbidities, since randomized controlled trials rarely include this 
subpopulation. However, the fixed combination indacaterol/glycopyrronium has 
shown a favorable CV safety profile in both healthy volunteers and COPD 
patients. Thus, we aimed to assess the CV safety 
pro<X00_Del_TrennDivis>--</X00_Del_TrennDivis> file of the fixed combination 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium 110/50 μg in a series of COPD patients aged ≥ 80 
years with several comorbidities. Our results indicate that this combination is 
safe in the comorbid elderly, since no significant electrocardiographic 
abnormalities were recorded after the administration of the inhaled therapy. 
Only rare and nonclinically significant changes in heart rate and corrected QT 
interval duration were evident, mainly in females and in patients with 
concomitant impaired kidney function.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000487182
PMID: 29705783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jun 2;2015(6):CD011438. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011438.pub2.

long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) added to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) 
versus addition of long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) for adults with asthma.

Kew KM(1), Evans DJ, Allison DE, Boyter AC.

Author information:
(1)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London, 
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK, SW17 0RE.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011438.

BACKGROUND: Poorly controlled asthma and preventable exacerbations place a 
significant strain on healthcare, often requiring additional medications, 
hospital stays or treatment in the emergency department.Long-acting 
beta2-agonists (LABA) are the preferred add-on treatment for adults with asthma 
whose symptoms are not well controlled on inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), but 
have important safety concerns in asthma. long acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMA) have confirmed efficacy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and are 
now being considered as an alternative add-on therapy for people with 
uncontrolled asthma.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of adding a LAMA to ICS compared 
with adding a LABA for adults whose asthma is not well controlled on ICS alone.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group's Specialised Register 
(CAGR) from inception to April 2015, and imposed no restriction on language of 
publication. We searched additional resources to pick up unpublished studies, 
including ClinicalTrials.gov, World Health Organization trials portal, reference 
lists of primary studies and existing reviews, and manufacturers' trial 
registries. The most recent search was conducted in April 2015.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We searched for parallel and cross-over RCTs in which adults 
whose asthma was not well controlled with ICS alone were randomised to receive 
LAMA add-on or LABA add-on for at least 12 weeks.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently screened the 
electronic and additional searches and extracted data from study reports. We 
used Covidence for duplicate screening, extraction of study characteristics and 
numerical data, and risk of bias ratings.The pre-specified primary outcomes were 
exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids (OCS), quality of life and serious 
adverse events.
MAIN RESULTS: We included eight studies meeting the inclusion criteria, but four 
double-blind, double-dummy studies of around 2000 people dominated the analyses. 
These four trials were between 14 and 24 weeks long, all comparing tiotropium 
(usually Respimat) with salmeterol on top of medium doses of ICS.Studies 
reporting exacerbations requiring OCS showed no difference between the two 
add-ons, but our confidence in the effect was low due to inconsistency between 
studies and because the confidence intervals (CI) included significant benefit 
of either treatment (odds ratio (OR) 1.05, 95% CI 0.50 to 2.18; 1753 
participants; 3 studies); three more people per 1000 might have an exacerbation 
on LAMA, but the CIs ranged from 29 fewer to 61 more. Imprecision was also an 
issue for serious adverse events and exacerbations requiring hospital admission, 
rated low (serious adverse events) and very low quality (exacerbations requiring 
hospital admission), because there were so few events in the analyses.People 
taking LAMA scored slightly worse on two scales measuring quality of life 
(Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire; AQLQ) and asthma control (Asthma Control 
Questionnaire; ACQ); the evidence was rated high quality but the effects were 
small and unlikely to be clinically significant (AQLQ: mean difference (MD) 
-0.12, 95% CI -0.18 to -0.05; 1745 participants; 1745; 4 studies; ACQ: MD 0.06, 
95% CI 0.00 to 0.13; 1483 participants; 3 studies).There was some evidence to 
support small benefits of LAMA over LABA on lung function, including on our 
pre-specified preferred measure trough forced expiratory volume in one second 
(FEV1) (MD 0.05 L, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.09; 1745 participants, 4 studies). However, 
the effects on other measures varied, and it is not clear whether the magnitude 
of the differences were clinically significant.More people had adverse events on 
LAMA but the difference with LABA was not statistically significant.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Direct evidence of LAMA versus LABA as add-on therapy is 
currently limited to studies of less than six months comparing tiotropium 
(Respimat) to salmeterol, and we do not know how they compare in terms of 
exacerbations and serious adverse events. There was moderate quality evidence 
that LAMAs show small benefits over LABA on some measures of lung function, and 
high quality evidence that LABAs are slightly better for quality of life, but 
the differences were all small. Given the much larger evidence base for LABA 
versus placebo for people whose asthma is not well controlled on ICS, the 
current evidence is not strong enough to say that LAMA can be substituted for 
LABA as add-on therapy.The results of this review, alongside pending results 
from related reviews assessing the use of LAMA in other clinical scenarios, will 
help to define the role of these drugs in asthma and it is important that they 
be updated as results from ongoing and planned trials emerge.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011438.pub2
PMCID: PMC6513433
PMID: 26031392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Kayleigh Kew: none known. David Evans: none 
known. Debbie Allison: none known. Anne Boyter: none known.


357. J Med Chem. 2015 May 28;58(10):4131-64. doi: 10.1021/jm5013227. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Bronchodilating drugs for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: current status 
and future trends.

Montuschi P(1), Ciabattoni G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of the 
Sacred Heart, Largo Francesco Vito, 1, Rome, 00168, Italy.

Inhaled bronchodilators, including long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists 
(LAMA) and long-acting beta-adrenoreceptor agonists (LABA), are the mainstay of 
pharmacological treatment of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Among approved LAMA, tiotropium bromide, glycopyrronium bromide, and 
umeclidinium bromide are administered once daily, whereas aclidinium bromide is 
administered every 12 h. New LAMA are under development for COPD. Among the 
approved LABA, indacaterol has a 24 h duration of action, whereas salmeterol and 
formoterol require twice-daily administration. New once-daily LABA, including 
vilanterol, olodaterol, milveterol, carmoterol, and abediterol, are in 
development. LAMA/LABA fixed dose combinations (FDCs) provide the convenience of 
two bronchodilators with different mechanism of action in a single inhaler. 
Indacaterol/glycopyrronium, umeclidinium/vilanterol, and olodaterol/tiotropium 
FDCs have been approved or are under approval and are likely to become a 
standard pharmacological strategy for COPD. Inhaled dual-pharmacology compounds, 
combining muscarinic antagonism and beta-agonism (MABA) in a single molecule, 
potentially provide additive or synergistic bronchodilation over either inhaled 
antimuscarinic or beta-agonist monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1021/jm5013227
PMID: 25587755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. COPD. 2017 Feb;14(1):80-85. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1240159. Epub 2016 Nov 7.

Can Assessment of Disease Burden Prior to Changes in Initial COPD Maintenance 
Treatment Provide Insight into Remaining Unmet Needs? A Retrospective Database 
Study in UK Primary Care.

Landis SH(1), Wurst K(2), Le HV(3)(4), Bonar K(1), Punekar YS(5).

Author information:
(1)a Real World Evidence, GlaxoSmithKline R&D , Uxbridge , UK.
(2)b Real World Evidence, GlaxoSmithKline R&D , Upper Providence , PA , USA.
(3)c Health Economics & Real World Evidence, Parexel International , Durham , NC 
, USA.
(4)d GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Research Triangle Park , NC , USA.
(5)e Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline R&D , Brentford , UK.

This retrospective cohort study aimed to assess treatment patterns over 
24 months amongst patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
initiating a new COPD maintenance treatment, and to understand clinical 
indicators of treatment change. Patients included in the study initiated a 
long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), or a 
combination of LABA and an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS/LABA) between January 1, 
2009, and November 30, 2013, as recorded in the United Kingdom Clinical Practice 
Research Datalink (UK CPRD). Treatment modifications (switching or adding 
maintenance treatments) over 24 months were assessed, and patient 
characteristics, disease burden, medication and healthcare resource use during 
the 30 days before treatment modification were evaluated. The cohort comprised 
17,258 patients [LABA (8%), LAMA (39%) and ICS/LABA (54%)] with similar age, 
body mass index and dyspnoea distribution. LABA users were more likely than LAMA 
users to add a maintenance therapy. Distinct patterns of treatment augmentations 
were noted, whereby LABA users typically received dual therapy before moving to 
triple therapy, while LAMA users moved to triple therapy by directly adding an 
ICS/LABA. Exacerbation events immediately prior to treatment change were not 
frequently recorded; however, the need for rescue short-acting medication and 
assessment of dyspnoea in the 30 days prior to the treatment change suggest that 
dyspnoea is a remaining unmet need driving therapy change.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1240159
PMID: 27819513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Adv Ther. 2019 Dec;36(12):3291-3298. doi: 10.1007/s12325-019-01119-w. Epub 2019 
Oct 25.

Optimizing the Development Strategy of Combination Therapy in Respiratory 
Medicine: From Isolated Airways to Patients.

Calzetta L(1), Matera MG(2), Cazzola M(3), Rogliani P(3).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. luigino.calzetta@uniroma2.it.
(2)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(3)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.

Comment on
    Adv Ther. 2019 Apr;36(4):962-968.

The current recommendations for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) are pushing towards triple combination therapy based on the 
combination of an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) associated with two 
bronchodilator agents. However, dual bronchodilation remains the cornerstone for 
the treatment of most COPD patients. Combining a long-acting beta adrenoceptor 
agonist (LABA) with a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) induces 
appreciable synergistic bronchorelaxant effect in human airways, especially when 
the medications are combined at isoeffective concentrations. Thus, each 
LABA/LAMA combination is characterized by a specific range of 
concentration-ratio at which the drug mixture may induce sustained synergistic 
interaction. Results of a recent randomized controlled trial (RCT, NCT00696020) 
and evidences from pre-clinical studies in human isolated airways poses the 
question whether combining tiotropium 5 μg with olodaterol 5 μg is the best 
combination option: tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg has the same efficacy profile 
of tiotropium/olodaterol 5/2 μg, and it is less effective than 
tiotropium/olodaterol 5/10 μg. Furthermore, tiotropium/olodaterol 5/2 μg, 
5/5 μg, and 5/10 μg combinations are generally characterized by the same safety 
profile. Indeed tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg is effective and safe in COPD, but 
a different development strategy based on solid data obtained from human 
isolated airways would have driven towards a better-balanced FDC to be tested in 
Phase III RCTs. Accurate bench-to-bedside plans are needed also in the 
development of triple combination therapies for asthma and COPD, in which the 
presence of an ICS in the formulation may further modulate the beneficial 
interaction between the LABA and the LAMA.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-019-01119-w
PMCID: PMC6860506
PMID: 31654332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Rev Med Liege. 2018 Sep;73(9):480-484.

[Trimbow® : twice-daily triple combination for the treatment of COPD].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Corhay JL(1), Bonhomme O(1), Guiot J(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Pneumologie, CHU de Liège, Site Sart Tilman, Liège, Belgique.

Single-inhaler triple therapy in extrafine solution combining an inhaled 
corticostéroid (ICS), the dipropionate of beclométasone, a long acting 
ß2-agonist (LABA), the fumarate of formoterol and an long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA), the bromide of glycopyrronium, was developed for the 
treatment of the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Trimbow® is the 
first triple therapy in spray with fixed dose and containing 3 pharmacological 
agents (LABA-LAMA-ICS). Clinical trials show that Trimbow® improves numerous 
parameters such as the respiratory function, the quality of life, the symptoms 
and the rate of moderate to severe exacerbations while being tolerated well. 
These results justify its use in severe and very severe COPD with exacerbations 
in spite of treatment by LABA-LAMA or LABA-ICS. In this article, we present a 
brief synthesis of the main recent clinical trials on Trimbow®, its comparison 
with other pharmacological agents/associations regularly used in the treatment 
of COPD, as well as some practical information on its use in routine.

Publisher: Une triple association fixe en solution extrafine comprenant un 
corticostéroïde inhalé (CSI), le dipropionate de béclométasone, un ?2-agoniste à 
effet prolongé (LABA), le fumarate de formotérol, et un antagoniste muscarinique 
à action prolongée (LAMA), le bromure de glycopyrronium, a été développée pour 
le traitement de la broncho-pneumopathie chronique obstructive (BPCO). Le 
Trimbow® est ainsi la première trithérapie en aérosol à dose fixe et contenant 
trois agents pharmacologiques (LABA-LAMA-CSI). Les études cliniques montrent que 
le Trimbow® améliore de nombreux paramètres tels que la fonction respiratoire, 
la qualité de vie, les symptômes et le taux d’exacerbations modérées à sévères, 
tout en étant bien toléré. Ces résultats justifient son utilisation dans la BPCO 
sévère à très sévère, avec exacerbations en dépit d’un traitement par LABA-LAMA 
ou LABA-CSI. Dans cet article, nous présentons une brève synthèse des 
principales études cliniques récentes sur le Trimbow®, sa comparaison avec 
d’autres agents/associations pharmacologiques régulièrement utilisés dans le 
traitement de la BPCO, ainsi que quelques informations pratiques sur son 
utilisation en routine.

PMID: 30188035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


361. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2018 Sep 28;28(1):36. doi: 10.1038/s41533-018-0102-x.

Population-based study of LAMA monotherapy effectiveness compared with LABA/LAMA 
as initial treatment for COPD in primary care.

Barrecheguren M(1), Monteagudo M(2)(3), Miravitlles M(4).

Author information:
(1)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d´Hebron. Ciber de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Primary Care University Research Institute Jordi Gol (IDIAP Jordi Gol), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra (Cerdanyola del Vallès), Spain.
(4)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d´Hebron. Ciber de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain. 
mmiravitlles@vhebron.net.

This epidemiological study aimed to describe and compare the characteristics and 
outcomes of COPD patients starting treatment with a long-acting anti-muscarinic 
(LAMA) or a combination of a long-acting beta-2 agonist (LABA)/LAMA in primary 
care in Catalonia (Spain) over a one-year period. Data were obtained from the 
Information System for the Development in Research in Primary Care (SIDIAP), a 
population database containing information of 5.8 million inhabitants (80% of 
the population of Catalonia). Patients initiating treatment with a LAMA or 
LABA/LAMA in 2015 were identified, and information about demographic and 
clinical characteristics was collected. Then, patients were matched 1:1 for age, 
sex, FEV1%, history of exacerbations, history of asthma and duration of 
treatment, and the outcomes between the two groups were compared. During 2015, 
5729 individuals with COPD started treatment with a LAMA (69.8%) or LAMA/LABA 
(30.2%). There were no remarkable differences between groups except for a lower 
FEV1 and more previous hospital admissions in individuals on LABA/LAMA. The 
number of tests and referrals was low and decreased in both groups during 
follow-up. For the same severity status, the evolution was similar with a 
reduction in exacerbations in both groups. Treatment was changed during 
follow-up in up to 34.2% of patients in the LABA/LAMA and 26.3% in the LAMA 
group, but adherence was equally good for both. Our results suggest that initial 
therapy with LAMA in monotherapy may be adequate in a significant group of mild 
to moderate patients with COPD and a low risk of exacerbations managed in 
primary care.

DOI: 10.1038/s41533-018-0102-x
PMCID: PMC6162319
PMID: 30266978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.B. has received speaker fees from Grifols, 
Menarini, GSK and consulting fees from Novartis and Gebro Pharma. M.M. has 
received speaker fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, Menarini, Rovi, 
Grifols and Novartis, and consulting fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Gebro Pharma, CSL Behring, Novartis and Grifols. The other 
author declares no competing interests.


362. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2018 Aug;19(11):1279-1287. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2018.1498841. Epub 2018 Aug 13.

Single inhaler triple therapy with extrafine beclomethasone, formoterol, and 
glycopyrronium for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Singh D(1).

Author information:
(1)a University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, The Langley Building, 
Manchester University NHS Foundation Hospital Trust , Manchester , UK.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) management focuses on the 
alleviation of symptoms and prevention of exacerbations. Inhaled long acting 
bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are the main classes of 
treatment for COPD. Triple therapy with a long acting beta2-agonist (LABA), long 
acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), and ICS is commonly prescribed for 
symptomatic COPD patients experiencing regular exacerbations. Triple therapy is 
usually administered using separate inhalers; there is little clinical trial 
evidence of an effect on exacerbation prevention with this approach. Areas 
covered: This evaluation reviews the single inhaler extrafine combination 
containing beclometasone diproprionate (BDP), formoterol fumarate (FF), and 
glycopyrronium bromide (GB) which has been developed as a simplified triple 
regime. BDP/FF/GB significantly reduced exacerbation rates in three clinical 
trials (1-year duration) compared against LAMA monotherapy (20% exacerbation 
reduction), ICS/LABA combination (23% exacerbation reduction), and LAMA/LABA 
combination (15% exacerbation reduction). Expert opinion: The practical benefits 
of single inhaler triple therapy in the real world have not been studied. 
However, the robust clinical trial evidence that BDP/FF/GB reduces exacerbations 
compared to double combination treatments and LAMA monotherapy cements triple 
therapy positioning as an escalation step in COPD management pathways.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2018.1498841
PMID: 29985096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Respir Med. 2015 Aug;109(8):1031-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.05.012. Epub 2015 
May 22.

Indacaterol vs tiotropium in COPD patients classified as GOLD A and B.

Mahler DA(1), Kerstjens HA(2), Donohue JF(3), Buhl R(4), Lawrence D(5), Altman 
P(6).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA. Electronic address: mahlerdonald@gmail.com.
(2)University of Groningen, Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Tuberculosis, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands; University of 
Groningen, Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and COPD (GRIAC), University 
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
h.a.m.kerstjens@umcg.nl.
(3)Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, CB# 7020, 130 Mason Farm Rd, 
4th Floor Bioinformatics Building, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic 
address: james_donohue@med.unc.edu.
(4)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, Langenbeckstrasse 1, Mainz 
D-55131, Germany. Electronic address: r.buhl@3-med.klinik.uni-mainz.de.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. Electronic 
address: davejlawrence@hotmail.com.
(6)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA. Electronic 
address: pablo.altman@novartis.com.

INTRODUCTION: According to current GOLD strategy, patients with COPD classified 
as groups A and B may be treated with inhaled bronchodilators, either 
long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) or long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA). 
However, there is little guidance on which class of agent is preferred and a 
lack of prospective data to differentiate the two.
METHODS: In this study, we performed post-hoc analyses of pooled data from two 
prospective, controlled clinical trials comparing the LABA indacaterol and LAMA 
tiotropium in 1422 patients with moderate airflow limitation and no history of 
exacerbations in the previous year. This population fits the definitions of GOLD 
A and B groups and could be further stratified by symptom severity using 
Baseline Dyspnea Index (i.e. modeling GOLD A or B) and inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS) use at baseline. Outcomes measured after 12 weeks of treatment were lung 
function (forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FEV1), health status (St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire; SGRQ), symptoms (Transition Dyspnea Index; TDI) and 
rescue medication use.
RESULTS: In 'GOLD A' patients not receiving ICS, differences favored indacaterol 
versus tiotropium (trough FEV1 0.05 L; rescue medication use -0.41 puffs/day; 
TDI total score 0.94 points; SGRQ total score -3.13 units, all p < 0.01). In 
'GOLD B, no ICS' patients, compared with tiotropium, indacaterol treatment 
increased trough FEV1 (0.055 L, p < 0.05) and permitted a larger reduction in 
rescue medication use (-0.81 puffs/day, p = 0.004). In all patients, and in 
patients not using ICS, differences favored indacaterol for all variables.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that patients in GOLD groups A and B may 
experience greater benefits with indacaterol than with tiotropium.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.05.012
PMID: 26094050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Prescrire Int. 2016 Nov;25(176):272-277.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Useful medications for patients with 
recurrent symptoms.

[No authors listed]

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a respiratory disorder 
characterised by largely irreversible changes in air flow due to irritants such 
as tobacco smoke. Patients with COPD experience acute exacerbations. Severe 
disease may progress to chronic respiratory failure. We reviewed the literature 
on basic medications available for COPD, using the standard Prescrire 
methodology. There are few clinical data on treatment of mild COPD. Regular 
medication is not necessary for patients who do not have recurrent symptoms. 
Eliminating exposure to cigarette smoke and other irritants such as workplace 
irritants, is the only measure known to improve the outcome of COPD. Evaluation 
of inhaled short-acting beta-2 agonists is based mainly on short-term trials. 
These drugs have been shown to improve dyspnoea. Salmeterol and formoterol, two 
long-acting beta-2 agonists, have been extensively evaluated in symptomatic 
patients. Compared with no treatment, these drugs reduce breathlessness and 
acute exacerbations, preventing about two hospital admissions per 100 patients 
with moderate to severe COPD treated for 7 months. Indacaterol and olodateroldo 
not have a better harm-benefit balance. Inhaled beta-2 agonists occasionally 
provoke cardiovascular disorders. No excess mortality has been reported among 
the thousands of COPD patients included in clinical trials. There Is little 
evidence that ipratropium, an inhaled short-acting anti-muscarinic 
bronchodilator, improves COPD symptoms. A risk of Increased mortality among COPD 
patients treated with ipratroplum cannot be ruled out. Tiotroplum, an inhaled 
long-acting antimuscarinic bronchodilator, has been extensively evaluated In 
COPD. Tiotroplum has symptomatic efficacy in COPD, reducing dyspnoea and acute 
exacerbations. Tiotroplum had no tangible advantages over long-acting beta-2 
agonists in seven randomised trials including more than 12 000 patients. 
Glycopyrronium and aclidinium, two other Inhaled long-acting antimuscarinics, do 
not appear to be more effective. Tiotroplum, like other inhaled 
anti-muscarinics, has antimuscarinic adverse effects including cardiac, visual 
and buccal disorders. Glycopyronium may carry a higher risk of serious 
cardiovascular effects. Combination of an antimuscarinic with an inhaled beta-2 
agonist improves symptoms in 7% to 10% of patients. In patients with one or two 
COPD exacerbations per year, adding an Inhaled corticosterold (beclometa- sone, 
budesonide or fluticasone) to a long-acting beta-2 agonist prevents about 1 
exacerbation during 3 to 4 years of treatment. Inhaled corticosteroids can cause 
pneumonia, candidiasis, dysphonia and adrenal Insufficiency. Fluticasone seems 
to have more adverse effects than other inhaled corticosterolds. Theophylline 
has uncertain efficacy on symptoms of COPD. This drug has a narrow therapeutic 
index and carries a risk of serious adverse effects. It should not be used in 
COPD. Long-term treatment with roflumilast or oral corticosteroids has an 
unfavourable harm-benefit balance in COPD. In practice, in 2016, the first 
measure in COPD is to eliminate exposure to the irritant, most often tobacco. 
Drugs used in COPD have only modest, mainly symptomatic efficacy. Treatment 
should be adapted to symptoms and the frequency of exacerbations: a short-acting 
beta-2 agonist should be tried first, then replaced by an inhaled long-acting 
bronchodilator, or possibly tiotropium, when its effect is too short-lived. An 
inhaled corticosteroid can be added if symptoms persist or exacerbations are 
frequent.

PMID: 30715829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Feb;30:11-5. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.003. Epub 
2014 Oct 30.

Indacaterol and tiotropium combination therapy in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Matsushima S(1), Inui N(2), Yasui H(1), Kono M(1), Nakamura Y(1), Toyoshima 
M(3), Shirai T(4), Suda T(1).

Author information:
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.
(2)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan; Department of Clinical 
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 
Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan. Electronic address: inui@hama-med.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hamamatsu Rosai Hospital, 25 Shougen-cho, 
Hamamatsu 430-8525, Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shizuoka General Hospital, 4-27-1 
Kita-ando, Shizuoka 420-0881, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Combination therapy with a long-acting antimuscarinic agent and a 
long-acting beta-agonist are recommended in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) if control is not adequate with one long-acting bronchodilator alone. We 
evaluated the effects of indacaterol and tiotropium combination therapy, 
including the effects of adding indacaterol to tiotropium (indacaterol add-on 
group) and adding tiotropium to indacaterol (tiotropium add-on group).
METHODS: We recruited 79 patients with COPD already treated with tiotropium or 
indacaterol. We undertook pulmonary function tests, the COPD assessment test 
(CAT), and the multi-frequency forced oscillation technique (to measure 
respiratory resistance and reactance) before and after 8 weeks of indacaterol 
and tiotropium combination therapy.
RESULTS: The median age was 72.1 years and the mean forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (FEV1) as a proportion of predicted was 57.2 ± 18.3%. After 8 weeks of 
combination therapy, FEV1 and %predicted FEV1 had increased significantly. There 
was no change in CAT score. For respiratory impedance, combination therapy 
improved resistance at 5 Hz (R5) and resistance at 20 Hz (R20) in the 
whole-breath, inspiratory and expiratory phases, and resonant frequency (Fres) 
in the inspiratory phase. The indacaterol add-on group (43 patients) and 
tiotropium add-on group (36 patients) showed improvements in FEV1 and %predicted 
FEV1 over monotherapy, although the CAT score fell significantly in the 
indacaterol add-on group (p = 0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: Indacaterol and tiotropium combination therapy improved airflow 
limitation and respiratory resistances. Adding indacaterol to tiotropium, or 
tiotropium to indacaterol, had similar effects on airflow limitation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.003
PMID: 25445929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Respir Res. 2017 Dec 4;18(1):202. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0681-z.

Dose selection for glycopyrrolate/eFlow(®) phase III clinical studies: results 
from GOLDEN (Glycopyrrolate for Obstructive Lung Disease via Electronic 
Nebulizer) phase II dose-finding studies.

Donohue JF(1), Goodin T(2), Tosiello R(2), Wheeler A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
North Carolina School of Medicine, CB# 7020, 130 Mason Farm Road, 4th Floor 
Bioinformatics Building, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. James_donohue@med.unc.edu.
(2)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., Marlborough, MA, USA.
(3)Present address: Spyryx Biosciences, Inc., Durham, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) are recommended for the 
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Glycopyrrolate/eFlow® 
is an investigational drug-device combination of the LAMA glycopyrrolate 
administered by an eFlow® Closed System (eFlow® CS) nebulizer. The GOLDEN 2 
(NCT01706536) and GOLDEN 6 (NCT02038829) Phase II, multicenter studies were 
conducted to inform dose selection for the GOLDEN Phase III clinical trials. 
Bronchodilator responses and safety assessments supported dose selection.
METHODS: Subjects with moderate-to-severe COPD were randomized into 28-day 
parallel-group (GOLDEN 2) or 7-day crossover (GOLDEN 6) studies and received 
placebo, glycopyrrolate (3, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50 or 100 μg twice daily [BID]) or 
aclidinium bromide 400 μg BID. The primary endpoint of both studies was change 
from baseline in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1). Safety 
assessments included the incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), 
treatment-emergent serious adverse events, and discontinuation due to TEAE. Lung 
function data collected in both studies were pooled.
RESULTS: The combined GOLDEN 2 (n = 282) and GOLDEN 6 (n = 96) studies included 
378 subjects. On Days 7 and 28 there were dose-ordered, statistically 
significant and clinically important lung function improvements in 
glycopyrrolate treatment groups. Specifically, on Day 7, glycopyrrolate produced 
>0.100 L placebo-adjusted changes from baseline in trough FEV1 (12.5 μg BID: 
0.122 L; 25 μg BID: 0.123 L; 50 μg BID: 0.137 L) and FEV1 AUC0-12 (12.5 μg BID: 
0.145 L; 25 μg BID: 0.178 L; 50 μg BID: 0.180 L). The improvements in lung 
function for the glycopyrrolate 25 and 50 μg BID doses were comparable to those 
with aclidinium bromide 400 μg BID (FEV1: 0.149 L; FEV1 AUC0-12: 0.172 L). 
Acceptable safety profiles were observed across all groups in both studies.
CONCLUSIONS: The efficacy and safety findings supported selection of 
glycopyrrolate 25 and 50 μg BID doses for the Phase III GOLDEN studies and 
provided preliminary evidence for the use of nebulized glycopyrrolate as a 
maintenance therapy for COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0681-z
PMCID: PMC5715551
PMID: 29202767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Ethics approval was provided by: GOLDEN 2 Central IRB: Shulman Associates IRB, 
4445 Lake Forest Drive, Suite 300, Cincinnati, OH 45242 (Chair: Susan Nelson 
MSN, RN, CNS). Local IRB: Dr. Nicola Hanania, Baylor College of Medicine Office 
of Research, One Baylor Plaza, Suite 600D, Houston, TX 77030 (Chair: Vernon R 
Sutton, MD, BS). GOLDEN 6 Central IRB: Quorum Review IRB, 1501 Fourth Ave, Suite 
800, Seattle, WA 98101 (Chair: Steven Rosenfeld MD, MBA). CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: Not applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: JFD has served as a consultant 
to Sunovion, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, 
Theravance, and has served on Drug Safety Monitoring Boards for AstraZeneca, 
Novartis, Gilead, INSMED and Grifolds. RT and TG are employees of Sunovion. AW 
was an employee of Sunovion at the time of the study. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer 
Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.


367. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2019 Feb;32(1):24-33. doi: 
10.1089/jamp.2018.1477. Epub 2018 Nov 17.

Satisfaction with the Use of eFlow Closed-System Nebulizer in Patients with 
Moderate-to-Very Severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Findings from a 
Long-Term Safety Study.

Kerwin EM(1), Donohue JF(2), Ferguson GT(3), Ganapathy V(4), Ozol-Godfrey A(4), 
Rajagopalan K(4).

Author information:
(1)1 Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, Medford, Oregon.
(2)2 University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina.
(3)3 Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, 
Michigan.
(4)4 Sunovion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Marlborough, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Effective delivery of inhaled drugs in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) depends on patients' ability to correctly use an inhalation 
device. Nebulized delivery may be appropriate for COPD patients who cannot 
coordinate breath with inhalation or generate adequate inhalational force. Until 
recently, long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), used for maintenance 
treatment of COPD, were available for delivery only via handheld inhalers. 
Lonhala™ Magnair™ (glycopyrrolate inhalation solution) is a LAMA delivered via 
the eFlow® closed-system (eFlow CS) vibrating membrane nebulizer. We assessed 
patient-reported ease of use and satisfaction with the eFlow CS nebulizer in the 
GOLDEN (Glycopyrrolate for Obstructive Lung Disease via Electronic Nebulizer)-5 
study.
METHODS: GOLDEN-5, a phase 3, randomized, open-label trial, evaluated the safety 
and efficacy of glycopyrrolate/eFlow CS 50 μg twice daily versus tiotropium 
18 μg once daily (administered via HandiHaler™) in patients with 
moderate-to-very severe COPD. Only patients in the glycopyrrolate/eFlow CS group 
completed a study-specific device use questionnaire, evaluating patients' 
perceptions about ease of use, confidence in drug delivery, and overall device 
satisfaction at week 48 or end of study. Responses were summarized by counts and 
percentages.
RESULTS: Of 620 patients who received glycopyrrolate/eFlow CS, 454 completed the 
questionnaire (mean age [standard deviation, SD] 63.3 [8.5] years; mean BMI [SD] 
28.45 [6.208] kg/m2). Based on patient-reported perceptions, most patients (83%) 
were "confident" to "very confident" that the drug was delivered into their 
lungs with the eFlow CS; >70% rated the eFlow CS as "easy" or "very easy" to 
assemble, operate, and clean. Most (75%) patients ranked themselves as being 
"satisfied" or "very satisfied" overall with the eFlow CS nebulizer.
CONCLUSIONS: High levels of satisfaction, confidence, and ease of use were 
reported with the eFlow CS nebulizer in this study. These findings support the 
use of the eFlow CS for maintenance treatment of COPD with glycopyrrolate 
inhalation solution.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2018.1477
PMID: 30457433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Comp Eff Res. 2019 Nov;8(15):1299-1316. doi: 10.2217/cer-2019-0101. Epub 2019 
Sep 27.

Costs, exacerbations and pneumonia after initiating combination tiotropium 
olodaterol versus triple therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Palli SR(1), Buikema AR(2), DuCharme M(2), Frazer M(2), Kaila S(1), Juday T(1).

Author information:
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Ridgefield, CT 06877, USA.
(2)Optum, Inc. Eden Prairie, MN 55344, USA.

Aim: To compare health plan-paid costs, exacerbations and pneumonia outcomes for 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) initiating 
combination tiotropium olodaterol (TIO + OLO) versus triple therapy (TT: 
long acting muscarinic antagonist + long-acting beta agonists + inhaled 
corticosteroid). Patients & methods: COPD patients initiating TIO + OLO or TT 
between 1 January 2014 and 30 June 2016 were identified from a managed care 
Medicare database and balanced for baseline characteristics using inverse 
probability of treatment weighting before assessment of outcomes. Results: 
Annual COPD-related and all-cause costs were US$4118 (35%) and US$5384 (23%) 
lower for TIO + OLO versus TT (both p ≤ 0.001). TIO + OLO patients had nearly 
half the severe exacerbations (8.3 vs 15.5%; p = 0.014) and pneumonia was also 
less common (18.9 vs 30.9%; p < 0.001). Conclusion: TIO + OLO was associated 
with improved economic and COPD health outcomes versus TT.

DOI: 10.2217/cer-2019-0101
PMID: 31559852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


369. COPD. 2016;13(1):11-8. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1043517. Epub 2015 Sep 29.

Emergency Hospital Care for Exacerbation of COPD: Is Inhaled Maintenance Therapy 
Modified?

Pomares X(1)(2)(3), Montón C(1)(4), Baré M(5)(6)(4), Pont M(5)(4), Estirado 
C(7), Gea J(7)(3), Quintana JM(8)(4), Vidal S(9), Santiago A(10); IRYSS-COPD 
Appropriateness study group.

Collaborators: Martínez-Tapias J, Ruiz A, Briones E, Perea-Milla E, Rivas F, 
Vidal S, Redondo M, Ruiz JR, Baré M, Torà N, Navarro G, Montón C, Lujan M, 
Moreno A, Ormaza J, Pomares X, Font J, Estirado C, Gea J, Blasco JA, de Larrea 
NF, Santiago A, Martínez-Virto A, Pulido E, Lobo JL, Sánchez M, Ruiz LA, 
Gastaminza AM, Agüero R, Gutiérrez G, Elizalde B, Aizpuru F, Arostegui I, Bilbao 
A, Tabernero E, Haro CM, Esteban C, González N, García S, Lafuente I, Aguirre U, 
Barrio I, Orive M, Arteta E, Quintana JM.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Respiratory Medicine , Parc Taulí Sabadell - University 
Hospital , Sabadell , Spain.
(2)b Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona , Esfera UAB , Barcelona , Spain.
(3)j Multidisciplinary and Multi-Institutional Research Network in Respiratory 
Diseases-CIBERES, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII) , Spain.
(4)i Health Services Research on Chronic Diseases Network- REDISSEC , Spain.
(5)c Clinical Epidemiology , Parc Taulí Sabadell - University Hospital , 
Sabadell , Spain.
(6)d Obstetrics, Gynecology and Preventive Medicine Department , Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona-UAB, Bellaterra , Barcelona , Spain.
(7)e Pulmonology Department, Hospital del Mar - IMIM. CEXS , Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra , Barcelona , Catalonia , Spain.
(8)f Research Unit, Galdakao Hospital , Bilbao , Spain.
(9)g Research Unit, Hospital Costa del Sol , Marbella , Spain.
(10)h Pulmonology Department. Hospital , La Paz . Madrid , Spain.

BACKGROUND: The impact of hospital emergency care and inward admission for acute 
exacerbations of COPD on inhaled maintenance treatment is not well known.
OBJECTIVE: Therefore, we evaluated the impact of short-stay emergency hospital 
care and inward admission for acute exacerbation of COPD (eCOPD) on inhaled 
maintenance treatment prescribed at discharge.
DESIGN: Prospective observational cohort study of patients presenting with eCOPD 
at emergency departments in 16 hospitals of the Spanish healthcare system. The 
ethics committee at each hospital approved the study and patients provided an 
informed consent before inclusion. We classified the patients according to the 
severity of COPD: mild/moderate (FEV1 ≥ 50% predicted) or severe/very severe 
(FEV1 < 50% predicted) and need of inward hospitalisation. We analysed changes 
to maintenance treatment on discharge according to GOLD strategy.
RESULTS: 1559 patients, 65% required hospitalisation. The most common 
maintenance treatment was inhaled corticoids (ICS) (80.9%) followed by 
long-acting beta-agonists (LABA) (75.4%). The most common combination was triple 
therapy (LABA+ LAMA+ICS) (56.2%) followed by LABA+ICS dual therapy (18.2%) 
regardless of the severity of COPD. In more than 60% of patients treatment was 
not changed at discharge. The most common change in treatment was a reduction 
when discharge was from emergency care and an increase after hospitalisation 
(-21.6% and +19.5% in severe/very severe COPD, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Emergency hospital care for eCOPD does not usually induce changes 
in inhaled maintenance treatment for COPD regardless of the duration of the 
hospital stay.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1043517
PMID: 26417965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 19;14:343-352. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S184653. eCollection 2019.

Medication adherence and persistence in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
patients receiving triple therapy in a USA commercially insured population.

Bogart M(1), Stanford RH(1), Laliberté F(2), Germain G(2), Wu JW(2), Duh MS(3).

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline plc, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA, 
michael.r.bogart@gsk.com.
(2)Groupe d'Analyse, Ltée, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(3)Analysis Group Inc., Boston, MA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: This longitudinal, retrospective cohort study of patients with 
COPD describes baseline characteristics, adherence, and persistence following 
initiation of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)/long-acting beta-agonists 
(LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) from multiple inhaler triple 
therapy (MITT).
METHODS: Patients aged ≥40 years receiving MITT between January 2012 and 
September 2015 were identified from the IQVIA™ Real-world Data Adjudicated 
Claims-USA database. MITT was defined as subjects with ≥1 overlapping days' 
supply of three COPD medications (ICS, LABA, and LAMA). Adherence (proportion of 
days covered, PDC) and discontinuation (defined as a gap of 1, 30, 60, or 90 
days of supply in any of the three components of the triple therapy) were 
calculated for each patient over 12 months of follow-up. In addition, analyses 
were stratified by number of inhalers.
RESULTS: In total, 14,635 MITT users were identified (mean age, 62 years). Mean 
PDC for MITT at 12 months was 0.37%. Mean PDC for the ICS/LABA and LAMA 
component at 12 months was 49% (0.49±0.31; median, 0.47) and 54% (0.54±0.33; 
0.56), respectively. The proportion of adherent patients (PDC ≥0.8) at 12 months 
was 14% for MITT. Allowing for a 30-day gap from last day of therapy, 86% of 
MITT users discontinued therapy during follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Patients with COPD had low adherence to and persistence with MITT in 
a real-world setting. Mean PDC for each single inhaler component was higher than 
the mean PDC observed with MITT. Reducing the number of inhalers may improve 
overall adherence to intended triple therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S184653
PMCID: PMC6388782
PMID: 30863037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure MB and RHS are employees of 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. and own shares in GSK. FL, GG, JWW, and MSD are employees 
of Analysis Group, Inc., a consulting company that has received research funds 
from GlaxoSmithKline plc. to conduct this study but they were not paid for 
manuscript development. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


371. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 Jan;16(1):107-15. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.2015.983076. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Indacaterol for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Matera MG(1), Rogliani P, Cazzola M.

Author information:
(1)Second University of Naples, Department of Experimental Medicine , Naples , 
Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The need for a rapid onset of action and a long duration of the 
broncholytic effect is the likely reason for the development of new long-acting 
beta-agonists (LABAs) that are fast acting and have true 24 h duration of action. 
Indacaterol is the archetype of once-daily LABAs and already marketed as a 
maintenance therapy in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
AREAS COVERED: Meta-analyses of published data or pooled analyses of primary 
data provide good insight into the clinical role of indacaterol in COPD.
EXPERT OPINION: The choice of the once-daily bronchodilator to start treatment 
in a patient with COPD mainly depends on the outcome of interest. Indacaterol is 
more effective than tiotropium if we consider symptoms or health-related quality 
of life as the primary outcome. Moreover, in symptomatic patient indacaterol 
should be preferred to tiotropium because of its rapid onset of action. By 
contrast, tiotropium appears to be more effective than indacaterol if 
exacerbations are the expected primary outcome. However, as 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination (QVA149) shows superior 
efficacy compared to glycopyrronium and tiotropium in patients with moderate to 
severe COPD, a fundamental question regarding the use of indacaterol that 
requires clarification is whether it is preferable to start immediately with 
QVA149 rather than using indacaterol alone.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.983076
PMID: 25418284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Gen Intern Med. 2015 Jan;30(1):51-9. doi: 10.1007/s11606-014-3029-0. Epub 2014 
Sep 23.

Low use and adherence to maintenance medication in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease in the general population.

Ingebrigtsen TS(1), Marott JL, Nordestgaard BG, Lange P, Hallas J, Dahl M, 
Vestbo J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Odense University Hospital, and Institute 
of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Sdr. Boulevard 29, 5000, 
Odense C, Denmark, trulsingebrigtsen@gmail.com.

Comment in
    J Gen Intern Med. 2015 Jan;30(1):96.

OBJECTIVE: We tested the hypothesis that use of and adherence to maintenance 
medication is low among individuals in the general population who have chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) , even in cases of severe and very severe 
COPD.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: We identified 5,812 individuals with COPD from the 
Copenhagen General Population Study, and classified them according to the Global 
Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) airflow limitation grades 1-4. 
Dispensing of fixed-dose combinations of inhaled corticosteroids with 
long-acting beta2-agonists, long-acting anti-cholinergics, or long-acting 
beta2-agonists was identified in a nationwide registry. Use of medication was 
defined as medication dispensed during a one-year period , and adherence was 
calculated from dosages available in one year.
KEY RESULTS: Use of fixed-dose combinations of inhaled corticosteroids with 
long-acting beta2-agonists varied from 2 % to 61 % (p < 0.001, test for trend), 
long-acting anti-cholinergics varied from 0.4 % to 36 % (p < 0.001), and 
long-acting beta2-agonists varied from 0.3 % to 11 % (p < 0.001. Among utilizers 
of these medications, adherence varied from 29 % to 56 % (p < 0.001, test for 
trend) across GOLD 1-4 for fixed-dose combinations of inhaled corticosteroids 
with long-acting beta2-agonists, from 51 % to 68 % (p = 0.11) for long-acting 
anti-cholinergics, and from 25 to 62 % (p = 0.01) for long-acting 
beta2-agonists.
CONCLUSIONS: Use of and adherence to maintenance medication for COPD in the 
general population was associated with the severity of COPD as defined by GOLD, 
but even in severe and very severe COPD, use and adherence was low.

DOI: 10.1007/s11606-014-3029-0
PMCID: PMC4284264
PMID: 25245885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Ir J Med Sci. 2019 Nov;188(4):1251-1259. doi: 10.1007/s11845-019-02001-y. Epub 
2019 Mar 28.

Improvement in health status with once-daily indacaterol/glycopyrronium 
110/50 μg in COPD patients: real-world evidence from an observational study in 
Ireland.

O'Doherty B(1), Dorman J(2), McGrath K(3), Kelly K(4), Molony D(5), Lacey S(6), 
Whelan S(7), Schmid S(8), Sullivan S(9).

Author information:
(1)Gorey Medical Centre, Conal House, St. Michaels Road Gorey, Co. Wexford, 
Ireland.
(2)6 The Mall, Rathquarter, Sligo, Ireland.
(3)SantryGP.ie Clinic, Unit 1 Northwood House, Northwood Business Park, Santry, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Western House Medical Centre, Western Rd, Clonmel, Co. Tipperary, Ireland.
(5)The Red House Family Practice, Mallow, Co. Cork, Ireland.
(6)Department of Mathematics, Cork Institute of Technology, Rossa Avenue, 
Bishopstown, Cork, T12 P928, Ireland.
(7)Novartis Ireland Limited, Vista Building, Elm Park, Merrion Road, Dublin 4, 
D04 A9N6, Ireland.
(8)Sandoz AG, Square 3, Novartis Campus, Fabrikstrasse 2, 4056, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(9)Novartis Ireland Limited, Vista Building, Elm Park, Merrion Road, Dublin 4, 
D04 A9N6, Ireland. shane.sullivan@novartis.com.

AIMS: Indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) 110/50 μg is a once-daily (o.d.) 
fixed-dose combination of long-acting beta-agonist/long acting muscarinic 
antagonist approved in over 90 countries, including Ireland, for the management 
of COPD. The present study was conducted to evaluate health status of COPD 
patients, initiated on IND/GLY 110/50 μg o.d., using the Clinical COPD 
Questionnaire (CCQ) tool in a real-world primary care setting in Ireland.
METHODS: This was a real-world, prospective, open-label study. COPD patients 
aged > 40 years and with a smoking history of > 10 pack-years were included and 
switched to once-daily IND/GLY 110/50 μg. Enrolment of patients into the study 
occurred only after the decision had been made by the physician to prescribe 
IND/GLY 110/50 μg. Data were collected at baseline and Week 26. Health status 
was assessed using the validated CCQ.
RESULTS: A total of 200 patients were included in study. The mean CCQ total 
score decreased from 2.36 at baseline to 1.44 at Week 26 (Δ, 0.92; P < 0.0005). 
Of the 156 patients who completed study, 113 (72.4%) achieved minimum clinically 
important difference in CCQ total score with IND/GLY 110/50 μg. CCQ domain 
scores also decreased during the study. Improvement in health status was 
observed across all GOLD groups and irrespective of prior COPD treatment. 
Adverse events were reported by 20% of patients with COPD exacerbation/infected 
COPD being the most common AE, reported by 11 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In real-life clinical practice in Ireland, IND/GLY 110/50 μg o.d. 
demonstrated statistically significant and clinically important improvement in 
health status in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11845-019-02001-y
PMID: 30924006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Jun 19;13:1965-1977. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S166455. eCollection 2018.

Efficacy and safety of four doses of glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate 
delivered via a metered dose inhaler compared with the monocomponents in 
patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.

Reisner C(1)(2), Pearle J(3), Kerwin EM(4), Rose ES(1), Darken P(1).

Author information:
(1)Pearl - a member of the AstraZeneca Group, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(2)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(3)California Research Medical Group, Inc., Fullerton, CA, USA.
(4)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, OR, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the efficacy and safety of glycopyrrolate/formoterol 
fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI 36/9.6, 36/7.2, 18/9.6, 9/9.6 µg) using 
innovative co-suspension delivery technology, compared with glycopyrrolate (GP) 
MDI 36 µg and formoterol fumarate (FF) MDI 9.6 µg, in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: In this Phase IIb, randomized, double-blind, balanced incomplete-block, 
two-period, cross-over study (NCT01349816), patients received treatment 
twice-daily for 7 days. The primary efficacy endpoint was forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) area under the curve from 0 to 12 hours (AUC0-12) on 
Day 7. Secondary efficacy endpoints were peak change from baseline in FEV1 
through 2 hours; time to onset of action (≥10% improvement in mean FEV1); 
proportion of patients achieving ≥12% improvement in FEV1 on Day 1; peak change 
from baseline in inspiratory capacity (IC) on Days 1 and 7; change from baseline 
in morning pre-dose FEV1; peak change from baseline in FEV1 through 6 hours; and 
change from baseline in mean evening 12-hour post-dose trough FEV1 on Day 7. 
Safety was assessed.
RESULTS: All 185 randomized patients received treatment. All doses of GFF MDI 
significantly improved the primary endpoint compared with GP MDI 36 µg (all 
P≤0.0137). For peak change in FEV1 and IC and time to onset of action secondary 
endpoints, ≥2 doses of GFF MDI demonstrated superiority to GP MDI 36 µg. No 
significant differences were observed between GFF MDI and FF MDI 9.6 µg for 
primary and secondary endpoints. The incidence of adverse events was similar 
between treatments.
CONCLUSION: While all doses of GFF MDI were superior to GP MDI 36 µg for the 
primary end-point, in this study neither superiority of GFF MDI to FF MDI 9.6 µg 
nor a clear dose-response was observed. All treatments were well tolerated with 
no unexpected safety findings.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S166455
PMCID: PMC6016010
PMID: 29950826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure CR is Chief Executive Officer of 
Pearl – a member of the AstraZeneca Group, and an employee of AstraZeneca. JP 
has received speaking fees from AstraZeneca, Genentech, Pfizer, and others, and 
has conducted trials on behalf of Boehringer Ingelheim, Forest, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Merck, Novartis, Sunovion, Teva, and others. EMK has served on advisory boards, 
speaker panels, or received travel reimbursement from Amphastar, AstraZeneca, 
Forest, Mylan, Novartis, Oriel, Pearl – a member of the AstraZeneca Group, 
Sunovion, Teva, and Theravance. He has conducted multicenter clinical trials for 
~40 pharmaceutical companies. ESR and PD are employees of Pearl – a member of 
the AstraZeneca Group. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


375. Respir Res. 2016 Mar 12;17:27. doi: 10.1186/s12931-016-0340-9.

Effect of tiotropium on night-time awakening and daily rescue medication use in 
patients with COPD.

Calverley PM(1), Rennard SI(2), Clerisme-Beaty E(3), Metzdorf N(4), Zubek VB(3), 
ZuWallack R(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Science Centre, University Hospital Aintree, Longmoor Lane, 
Liverpool, L9 7AL, UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk.
(2)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc, Ridgefield, CT, USA.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany.
(5)St Francis Hospital Medical Center, Hartford, CT, USA.

BACKGROUND: Several small studies found night-time awakenings due to COPD 
symptoms were associated with decreased health status. In this study, night-time 
awakenings in patients with COPD were examined and effects of tiotropium therapy 
evaluated.
METHODS: This study was a post hoc, exploratory, pooled analysis of twin, 
multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group 
trials. Patients with stable moderate-to-severe COPD were randomized to 
tiotropium HandiHaler® (n = 550) or placebo (n = 371) and followed for 13 weeks. 
During a 2-week, pre-treatment baseline period and for 13 weeks on treatment, 
self-reported night-time awakenings due to COPD symptoms, rescue medication 
(albuterol) use, and morning and evening peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) were 
recorded daily. Nightly, COPD-related awakenings were scored: 0 = no awakenings; 
1 = 1 awakening; 2 = 2-3 awakenings; or 3 = awake most of the night. 
Health-related quality-of-life (HRQoL) and energy-fatigue questionnaires were 
completed at baseline and during treatment.
RESULTS: Patients were aged 65.2 ± 8.7 years (mean ± SD), with a mean 
pre-bronchodilator FEV1 of 36.1 ± 13.5 % predicted normal at baseline. Data for 
night-time awakenings and albuterol use were available for 543 (99 %) patients 
on tiotropium and 352 (95 %) on placebo. At baseline, 280 (51.5 %) patients on 
tiotropium and 179 (50.1 %) on placebo reported ≥1 COPD-related night-time 
awakening per week. Over the 13-weeks' treatment, tiotropium was associated with 
fewer night-time awakenings, with mean ± SE overall awakening scores per week of 
0.356 ± 0.006 compared with 0.421 ± 0.007 for placebo (p < 0.001); means were 
significantly lower for tiotropium versus placebo in patients with baseline 
awakenings (p < 0.001), but not for those without baseline awakenings. 
COPD-related night-time awakenings were associated with increased nocturnal 
rescue medication use and lower HRQoL ratings in both treatment arms. Following 
start of treatment, tiotropium decreased patients' use of rescue medication 
compared with placebo, and morning and evening adjusted means for PEFR were 
higher for tiotropium compared with placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium is associated with decreased COPD-related night-time 
awakenings. Night-time awakenings are associated with increased nocturnal rescue 
medication use and may be a surrogate marker of symptom control in patients with 
COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-016-0340-9
PMCID: PMC4789269
PMID: 26971242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. BMC Pulm Med. 2016 Oct 11;16(1):135. doi: 10.1186/s12890-016-0291-4.

A systematic review of comparative studies of tiotropium Respimat® and 
tiotropium HandiHaler® in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 
does inhaler choice matter?

Dahl R(1), Kaplan A(2).

Author information:
(1)Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark. Ronald.Dahl2@rsyd.dk.
(2)Family Physician Airways Group of Canada, Richmond Hill, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: In many countries worldwide, the long acting beta agonists drug 
tiotropium is available as a dry powder formulation delivered by means of the 
HandiHaler® inhalation device and as an aqueous solution delivered via the 
Respimat® Soft Mist™ Inhaler. Tiotropium HandiHaler® is a single-dose, dry 
powder, breath-actuated inhaler that provides delivered doses and lung 
deposition of tiotropium that are, over a wide range, not influenced by the 
severity of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Tiotropium Respimat® 
is a propellant-free, multi-dose inhaler that delivers a metered dose of 
medication as a fine, slow-moving, long-lasting soft mist, independently of 
patient inspiratory effort. The high fine-particle fraction of droplets produced 
by the Respimat® inhaler optimizes the efficiency of drug delivery to the lungs.
METHODS: To help inform the choice of tiotropium inhaler for prescribers and 
patients, this systematic review summarizes the available pharmacokinetic, 
efficacy and safety data from comparative studies of tiotropium Respimat® and 
tiotropium HandiHaler® in COPD, focusing on the licensed once-daily doses of 5 
and 18 μg, respectively. Data sources reviewed include publications and 
abstracts identified from database searches.
RESULTS: Published evidence from comparative studies suggests that tiotropium 
Respimat® 5 μg and tiotropium HandiHaler® 18 μg provide similar clinical 
outcomes in patients with COPD.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings indicate that physicians can base their decision about 
an inhaler for tiotropium on factors other than efficacy or safety. These could 
be patient preference for a particular inhaler, ease of use and the efficiency 
of drug delivery, with the aim of optimizing adherence and clinical outcomes 
with long-term tiotropium maintenance therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-016-0291-4
PMCID: PMC5057252
PMID: 27724909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Apr 16;13:1229-1237. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S159732. eCollection 2018.

Indacaterol/glycopyrronium reduces the risk of clinically important 
deterioration after direct switch from baseline therapies in patients with 
moderate COPD: a post hoc analysis of the CRYSTAL study.

Greulich T(1), Kostikas K(2), Gaga M(3), Aalamian-Mattheis M(2), Lossi NS(4), 
Patalano F(2), Nunez X(5), Pagano VA(5), Fogel R(6), Vogelmeier CF(#)(1), 
Clemens A(#)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)University Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, German Center for Lung 
Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany.
(2)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)7th Respiratory Medicine Department, Athens Chest Hospital Sotiria, Athens, 
Greece.
(4)Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nürnberg, Germany.
(5)TFS Develop, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(7)Heart Center Freiburg University, Cardiology and Angiology I, Faculty of 
Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: COPD is a progressive disease characterized by exacerbations and a 
decline in health status and lung function. Clinically important deterioration 
(CID) is a composite endpoint used to evaluate treatment efficacy. This analysis 
evaluated the impact of a direct switch to once-daily indacaterol/glycopyrronium 
110/50 µg (IND/GLY) from previous monotherapy with a long-acting beta-agonist 
(LABA) or long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) or with an LABA and an 
inhaled corticosteroid (LABA + ICS) on reducing CID.
METHODS: CRYSTAL was a 12-week, prospective, multicenter, randomized, open-label 
study conducted in clinical practice settings. Three definitions of CID (D1-D3) 
were used, including: 1) ≥100 mL decrease in trough forced expiratory volume in 
1 second (FEV1), 2) ≥1 point decrease in transition dyspnea index (TDI) and/or 
≥0.4 points increase in clinical COPD questionnaire score (CCQ), or 3) an acute 
moderate/severe exacerbation (AECOPD). In D1 and D2, either TDI or CCQ was 
evaluated along with FEV1 and AECOPD, whereas in D3, all 4 parameters were 
included. ClinicalTrials.gov number: NCT01985334.
RESULTS: Of the 2,159 patients analyzed, 1,622 switched to IND/GLY and 537 
continued their baseline treatments. The percentage of patients with a CID was 
significantly lower after a direct switch to IND/GLY versus LABA or LAMA using 
all 3 CID definitions (D1: odds ratio [OR] 0.41 [95% CI: 0.30-0.55]; D2: OR 0.41 
[95% CI: 0.31-0.55]; D3: OR 0.39 [95% CI: 0.29-0.52]). Compared with LABA + ICS, 
IND/GLY also reduced the risk of CID (D1: OR 0.76 [95% CI: 0.56-1.02]; D2: OR 
0.75 [95% CI: 0.56-1.00]; D3: OR 0.67 [95% CI: 0.51-0.89]).
CONCLUSION: In this analysis, IND/GLY reduced the risk of a CID in moderate COPD 
patients after direct switch from LABA + ICS or LABA or LAMA in real-life 
clinical practice.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S159732
PMCID: PMC5909796
PMID: 29713156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure TG has received compensation from 
Novartis during the conduct of the study. He has also received lecture fees from 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, CSL-Behring, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Mundipharma, and 
Novartis, and received compensation for organizing or participating in advisory 
boards from AstraZeneca, CSL-Behring, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim and 
Grifols, and received a grant to support an AATD-Lab from Grifols. KK has 
previously received honoraria for speeches and consulting services from 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, ELPEN, and Takeda, and received honoraria for speeches from 
Boehringer Ingelheim outside the submitted work. MG has received a grant and 
personal fees from Novartis, Pharmaten and Menarini, outside the sub mitted 
work. She has also received personal fees from Chiesi, Boehringer Ingelheim and 
Teva, and received compensation for organizing or participating in advisory 
boards from GlaxoSmithKline, and received a grant from AstraZeneca. XN and VAP 
were statisticians for this subgroup analysis of the CRYSTAL study and work at a 
Novartis contracted CRO. CFV has received personal fees from Novartis during the 
conduct of the study. Outside the submitted work, he has received personal fees 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, 
Menarini, Mundipharma and Teva, and grants from GlaxoSmithKline and Grifols. KK 
is an employee and shareholder of Novartis Pharma AG. MA-M and NL are employees 
of Novartis Pharma AG. AC and FP are employees and shareholders of Novartis 
Pharma AG. RF is an employee and shareholder of Novartis Pharmaceutical 
Corporation. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


378. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2017 Sep 7;27(1):51. doi: 10.1038/s41533-017-0051-9.

Characteristics of newly diagnosed COPD patients treated with triple inhaled 
therapy by general practitioners: a real world Italian study.

Di Marco F(1), Santus P(2), Terraneo S(1), Peruzzi E(3), Muscianisi E(4), 
Ripellino C(5), Pegoraro V(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano. Respiratory 
Unit, San Paolo Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano. Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation Unit, Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri, Scientific Institute of 
Milan-IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(3)Epidemiology and Outcome Research Manager, Novartis Italia, Origgio, VA, 
Italy.
(4)Medical Franchise Leader Respiratory, Novartis Italia, Origgio, VA, Italy.
(5)Real World Evidence Consultant, QuintilesIMS, Milan, Italy.
(6)Real World Evidence Consultant, QuintilesIMS, Milan, Italy. 
valeria.pegoraro@quintilesims.com.

Factors predicting prescriptions of triple therapy were investigated in a large 
group of general practitioners in Italy. In the population treated by identified 
general practitioners, a cohort of newly diagnosed chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease patients was extracted from IMS Health Longitudinal Database during the 
period 2010-2013. From the diagnosis, 1-year follow-up was evaluated. Thirty-two 
thousand forty-six newly diagnosed chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
patients were evaluated (57.7% male, mean age 67 years). During 2 years prior to 
diagnosis less than 13% of patients were requested with a pulmonology evaluation 
and less than 5% with a spirometry; 65.1% cases were prescribed with a 
respiratory drug, which in 9.6% of cases was inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting 
beta-agonist fixed-dose combination. Two thousand and twenty eight patients (6.3% 
of the newly diagnosed chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients) were 
treated with triple therapy during the first year of follow-up, whose 858 
(42.3%) starting immediately, and 762 (37.6%) following an initial treatment 
with inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist fixed-dose combination. Being 
older, being requested with pulmonologist evaluation or spirometry, being 
prescribed with a inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting beta-agonist fixed-dose 
combination at diagnosis resulted independent predictors of triple therapy use.
CHRONIC LUNG DISEASE: ENSURING CORRECT PRESCRIPTIONS FOR EARLY-STAGE DISEASE: An 
improved education program for doctors promoting correct use of medication for 
chronic lung disease is needed in Italy. Current guidelines state that inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICSs) should be reserved for patients with severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but it appears that doctors do not always 
follow this advice. Fabiano Di Marco, at San Paolo Hospital-Università degli 
Studi di Milano, and co-workers analyzed data from 32,046 COPD patients 
newly-diagnosed by family doctors in Italy between 2010 and 2013. When the 
researchers followed up on patients after 1 year, 2028 (6.3%) of newly-diagnosed 
patients were being treated with triple inhaled therapy incorporating ICSs-42% 
of these patients had started triple therapy immediately upon diagnosis. Being 
an older male and having been prescribed with a ICS/LABA FDC at diagnosis were 
strong predictors of triple therapy use within 1 year from the diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41533-017-0051-9
PMCID: PMC5589801
PMID: 28883469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS: Ripellino and Pegoraro are 
employed at QuintilesIMS at the time of submission. Peruzzi and Muscianisi are 
employed at Novartis Farma Italy at the time of submission. Santus has received 
financial support for research from Pfizer, Almirall, Chiesi Farmaceutici, and 
AirLiquide. He has received honoraria for lectures at national meetings from 
Chiesi Farmaceutici, Novartis, Zambon Italia, AstraZeneca, 
Almirall,GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Menarini, and Malesci-Guidotti. 
He has served as consultant for Zambon Italia, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Chiesi 
Farmaceutici, and Boehringer Ingelheim. Di Marco has received honoraria for 
lectures at national and international meetings from Almirall, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Dompe, Guidotti/Malesci, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini, Novartis, and Zambon. He has served as consultant for 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Novartis, and Zambon. He has received 
financial support for research from Novartis. Terraneo declares no competing 
financial interest. ETHICAL APPROVAL: This article does not contain any new 
studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of the authors.


379. Sleep Breath. 2016 May;20(2):605-12. doi: 10.1007/s11325-015-1259-y. Epub 2015 
Sep 25.

Tiotropium Respimat Soft Mist Inhaler versus HandiHaler to improve sleeping 
oxygen saturation and sleep quality in COPD.

Bouloukaki I(1), Tzanakis N(2), Mermigkis C(2), Giannadaki K(2), Moniaki V(2), 
Mauroudi E(2), Michelakis S(2), Schiza SE(2).

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Thoracic Medicine, University of Crete, 
71110, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. izolthi@gmail.com.
(2)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Thoracic Medicine, University of Crete, 
71110, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

PURPOSE: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have poor 
sleep quality as a result of various alterations in oxygenation parameters and 
sleep macro- and micro-architecture. There is a shortage of data to support the 
efficacy of long-acting inhaled anticholinergic agents in improving these 
adverse effects, which are known to have a negative impact on clinical outcomes. 
We aimed to compare the tiotropium Respimat Soft Mist Inhaler and the HandiHaler 
in terms of their effects on sleeping oxygen saturation (SaO2) and sleep quality 
in patients with COPD.
METHODS: In a randomized, open-label, parallel-group trial involving 200 
patients with mild to moderate COPD (resting arterial oxygen tension >60 mmHg 
while awake), we compared the effects of 6 months' treatment with the two 
devices on sleeping SaO2 and sleep quality. Overnight polysomnography and 
pulmonary function testing were performed at baseline and after 6 months' 
treatment.
RESULTS: A total of 188 patients completed the trial. Both groups showed 
significant improvement in minimum sleep SaO2 and time of sleep spent with SaO2 
below 90 (TST90) compared to baseline. The patients using the Respimat had 
significantly better TST90 than did those using the HandiHaler. Sleep 
disturbance was highly variable in these patients, but the sleep stage durations 
were significantly better in the Respimat group.
CONCLUSIONS: Sleeping SaO2 can be improved by tiotropium delivered using either 
the HandiHaler device or the Respimat Soft Mist Inhaler. However, the patients 
who used the Respimat device had significantly better TST90 and sleep 
architecture parameters.

DOI: 10.1007/s11325-015-1259-y
PMID: 26407963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


380. BMC Pulm Med. 2015 Jan 12;15:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-15-2.

The Prospective Non-Interventional DACCORD Study in the National COPD Registry 
in Germany: design and methods.

Kardos P(1), Vogelmeier C(2), Buhl R(3), Criée CP(4), Worth H(5).

Author information:
(1)Group Practice and Centre for Allergy, Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Red 
Cross Maingau Hospital, Scheffelstrasse 33, 60318, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. 
kardos@lungenpraxis-maingau.de.
(2)Department of Respiratory Diseases, University of Marburg, 35043, Marburg, 
Germany. claus.vogelmeier@med.uni-marburg.de.
(3)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, 55131, Mainz, Germany. 
buhl@3-med.klinik.uni-mainz.de.
(4)Department of Sleep and Respiratory Medicine, Evangelical Hospital 
Goettingen-Weende, 37120, Bovenden, Germany. criee@ekweende.de.
(5)Department of Pulmonology and Cardiology, Hospital Fuerth, University 
Erlangen-Nuernberg, 90766, Fuerth, Germany. heinrich.worth@t-online.de.

BACKGROUND: A variety of large randomized controlled trials (RCT's) evaluating 
pharmacotherapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients does 
exist. One of the drugs that has been tested is the new long-acting 
anticholinergic glycopyrronium bromide.
METHODS: As the generalizability of results from RCT's is questionable we 
designed a longitudinal, prospective non-interventional study (DACCORD) of two 
years duration plus two years extension with at least 6000 participants in 
approximately 500 primary and secondary care practices in Germany (within the 
new established COPD National Prospective Registry), to assess patient reported 
outcomes (PRO's), lung function, adherence and drug safety. To circumvent the 
hurdle of inappropriate COPD diagnosis in a non-interventional trial, patients 
have to fulfill the inclusion criteria of the COPD disease management program 
(DMP) of the German statutory health insurances. Patient management should 
follow the German national COPD guidelines, which are based on Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 2007 (GOLD) report. Labels of prescribed 
drugs should also be taken into account. Patients received treatment as part of 
their standard care: at the discretion of the investigator patients were 
included in one of two arms. A: standard care with glycopyrronium containing 
regimen, and arm B: standard care without glycopyrronium.
DISCUSSION: For 2016 we expect important results regarding longitudinal 
development of PRO's including exacerbations, lung function, adherence and side 
effects. We also investigate applicability of the new GOLD staging system in 
usual care. Data on diagnostic and treatment modalities in current German 
primary and secondary care, as well as pharmaco-economic data will be generated.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: 1. German Register for non-interventional studies: 
http://www.vfa.de/de/arzneimittel-forschung/datenbanken-zu-arzneimitteln/nisdb . 
2. EMA EnCePP http://www.encepp.eu/ .

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2466-15-2
PMCID: PMC4417326
PMID: 25578330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


381. BMJ Open. 2019 Feb 20;9(2):e025048. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-025048.

Protocol for a systematic literature review and network meta-analysis of the 
clinical benefit of inhaled maintenance therapies in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Lewis A(1), Axson EL(1), Potts J(1), Tarnowska R(2), Vioix H(2), Quint JK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Epidemiology, National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd, Bracknell, UK.
(3)Department of Respiratory Epidemiology, Occupational Medicine and Public 
Health, Imperial College London, London, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations 
progress the course of disease and impair lung function. Inhaled maintenance 
therapy reduces exacerbations. It is not yet established which inhaled therapy 
combination is best to reduce exacerbations, lung function decline and symptom 
burden.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Cochrane Library will be searched 
for articles between January 2011 and May 2018 using a pre-specified search 
strategy. Conference proceedings will be searched. Systematic reviews (with or 
without meta-analysis), randomised controlled trials (RCTs), cohort studies and 
case controlled studies comparing six interventions comprising different 
combinations of long-acting bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids in 
unison or on their own. The primary outcome is the reduction in 
moderate-to-severe exacerbations. Secondary outcomes include: lung function, 
quality of life, mortality and other adverse events. Titles and abstracts will 
screened by the primary researcher. A second reviewer will repeat this on a 
proportion of records. The Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcomes and 
Study framework will be used for data extraction. A network meta-analyses of 
outcomes from RCTs and real-world evidence will be integrated if feasible. The 
95% credible interval will be used to assess the statistical significance of 
each summary effect. Ranking of interventions will be based on their surface 
under cumulative ranking area.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: COPD exacerbations are burdensome to patients. We aim 
to report results that provide clinicians with a more informed choice of which 
inhaled therapy combinations are best to reduce exacerbations, improve disease 
burden and reduce lung function and exercise capacity decline, compared with the 
potential harms, in certain populations with COPD.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42018088013.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-025048
PMCID: PMC6398788
PMID: 30787090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AL was funded by Boehringer 
Ingelheim Ltd to perform this systematic review and network meta-analysis. ELA 
has nothing to declare. JP has nothing to declare. RT and HV are employees of 
Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd. JKQ’s research group has received funding from The 
Health Foundation, MRC, Wellcome Trust, BLF, GSK, Insmed, AZ and Bayer for other 
projects, none of which relate to this work. BI have funded this work. JKQ has 
received funds from AZ, GSK, Chiesi, Teva and BI for Advisory board 
participation or travel.


382. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015 Jun;16(9):1403-9. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.2015.1045877.

Tiotropium bromide as add-on therapy to inhaled corticosteroids for treating 
asthma.

Matsuse H(1), Yamagishi T, Kodaka N, Miura A, Kurose Y, Nakano C, Oshio T.

Author information:
(1)Toho University Ohashi Medical Center, Division of Respirology, Department of 
Internal Medicine , 2-17-6 Ohashi Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8515 , Japan +81 3 3468 
1251 ; +81 3 3468 5082 ; hiroto.matsuse@med.toho-u.ac.jp.

INTRODUCTION: Bronchial asthma is becoming increasingly prevalent worldwide. 
Although first-line therapy with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) with or without 
long-acting beta agonists (LABA) has significantly improved the clinical outcomes 
of asthma, they cannot provide all asthmatics with good control and thus 
alternatives or add-on drugs are required. Tiotropium is a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist that has been used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease and it has been approved for treating asthma in some countries. This 
agent has similar bronchodilatory effects to those of LABA and might also have 
anti-inflammatory and anti-remodeling effects.
AREAS COVERED: Some pivotal clinical trials have found tiotropium effective as 
an add-on medication for low-to-medium doses of ICS for treating symptomatic 
asthma and asthma that remains uncontrolled despite ICS plus LABA therapy.
EXPERT OPINION: Whether or not tiotropium has anti-inflammatory and 
anti-remodeling effects in humans with asthma is an important issue. Predictors 
that would identify patients who would derive the maximal potential benefit from 
treatment with tiotropium in addition to their current therapy are also needed. 
Although the cardiovascular toxicity of tiotropium is less remarkable in asthma 
than in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, longer and larger studies are 
still needed to confirm the safety of tiotropium for treating asthma.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2015.1045877
PMID: 26001185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Am J Hosp Palliat Care. 2016 Aug;33(7):638-43. doi: 10.1177/1049909115598928. 
Epub 2015 Aug 9.

Commonly Prescribed Medications Among Patients in Hospice Care for Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Afrane M(1), Sera L(2), Holmes HM(3), McPherson ML(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Services, MedStar Union Memorial Hospital, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacy Practice and Science, University of Maryland School of 
Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD, USA lsera@rx.umaryland.edu.
(3)Department of General Internal Medicine/Healthy Aging Clinic, University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacy Practice and Science, University of Maryland School of 
Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD, USA.

PURPOSE: End-stage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) presents health 
care providers with challenges of providing optimal palliative care for patients 
who follow a less predictable trajectory. The objectives of this study were to 
evaluate medications being prescribed to patients with end-stage COPD, compared 
to recommendations made by the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease (GOLD) guidelines, and to determine which medications were provided by 
the hospice organization.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed our database for medications pertaining to 
COPD management as stated in the GOLD criteria or those used for symptoms 
associated with end of life.
RESULTS: A total of 745 patients met inclusion criteria, and approximately 63% 
were prescribed opioids. Prescribing rates for oxygen, short-acting beta-agonists, 
and short-acting anticholinergics were 37%, 33%, and 31%, respectively. Systemic 
and inhaled corticosteroids were prescribed at higher rates of 20% and 18% 
compared to long-acting bronchodilators.
DISCUSSION: Medications used for COPD exacerbation management were prescribed at 
higher rate than those used for maintenance treatment.

© The Author(s) 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1049909115598928
PMCID: PMC4747865
PMID: 26261375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Respir Res. 2019 Oct 30;20(1):241. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1187-7.

Maintained therapeutic effect of revefenacin over 52 weeks in moderate to very 
severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD).

Donohue JF(1), Kerwin E(2), Sethi S(3), Haumann B(4), Pendyala S(4), Dean L(4), 
Barnes CN(4), Moran EJ(4), Crater G(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Medicine, UNC School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, Medford, OR, USA.
(3)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., 901 Gateway Boulevard, South San Francisco, 
CA, 94080, USA.
(5)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., 901 Gateway Boulevard, South San Francisco, 
CA, 94080, USA. gcrater@theravance.com.

BACKGROUND: Revefenacin is a long acting muscarinic antagonist that was recently 
approved for the nebulized treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Although shorter duration studies have documented the efficacy of 
revefenacin in COPD, longer-term efficacy has not been described. In a recent 
52-week safety trial, revefenacin was well tolerated and had a favorable 
benefit-risk profile. Here we report exploratory efficacy and health outcomes in 
patients receiving revefenacin 175 μg or 88 μg daily during the 52-week trial.
METHODS: In this randomized, parallel-group, 52-week trial (NCT02518139), 1055 
participants with moderate to very severe COPD received revefenacin 175 μg or 
88 μg in a double-blind manner, or open-label active control tiotropium.
RESULTS: Over the 52-week treatment period, both doses of revefenacin, as well 
as tiotropium, elicited significant (all p < 0.0003) improvements from baseline 
in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1). The trough FEV1 profile (least 
squares mean change from baseline) for revefenacin 175 μg ranged from 
52.3-124.3 mL and the trough FEV1 profile for tiotropium ranged from 
79.7-112.8 mL. In subgroup comparisons, the effect of revefenacin on trough FEV1 
was comparable in patients taking concomitant long-acting β-agonists, with or 
without inhaled corticosteroids, with patients who were not taking these 
medications. There were statistically significant (p < 0.05) improvements in all 
measured health status outcomes (evaluated using St. George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire, COPD Assessment Test, Clinical COPD Questionnaire and Baseline 
and Transition Dyspnea Index) from 3 months onward, in all treatment arms.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant sustained improvements from baseline in trough FEV1 and 
respiratory health outcomes were demonstrated for 175-μg revefenacin over 
52 weeks, further supporting its use as a once-daily bronchodilator for the 
nebulized treatment of patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02518139 ; Registered 5 August 2015.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1187-7
PMCID: PMC6822411
PMID: 31666076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.H., S.P., L.D., E.J.M. and G.C. are current 
employees of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. C.N.B was an employee of Theravance 
Biopharma US, Inc. at the time this study was conducted. J.F.D. is a consultant 
and advisory committee member for Mylan Inc., Theravance Biopharma, Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, and GSK. S.S. is a consultant and advisory 
committee member for Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., and received research 
support from Mylan Inc. E.K. has participated in consulting, advisory boards and 
speaker panels, or received travel reimbursement for Amphastar, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, Novartis, Oriel, Pearl, Sunovion, 
Teva and Theravance Biopharma. He has conducted multi-center clinical research 
trials for approximately 40 pharmaceutical companies.


385. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2016 Jun;54(6):405-15. doi: 10.5414/CP202558.

Population pharmacokinetics of IND/GLY (indacaterol/glycopyrronium) in COPD 
patients.

Demin I, Bartels C, Graham G, Bieth B, Gautier A, Tillmann HC, Sechaud R.

OBJECTIVE: Indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) is a fixed-dose combination 
(FDC) of indacaterol, an inhaled long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), and 
glycopyrronium, an inhaled long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), developed 
as a maintenance bronchodilator treatment for patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). A population pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis was 
performed to describe the PK profiles of indacaterol and glycopyrronium 
following the twice daily (b.i.d.) and once daily (o.d.) inhalation regimens as 
FDC or as monotherapies and to determine the effect of covariates.
METHODS: PK data in 556 COPD patients were pooled from three phase 3 studies. 
Two phase 3 studies investigated IND/GLY 27.5/12.5 μg b.i.d. and the third study 
investigated IND/GLY 110/50 μg o.d. Body weight was included in the model with 
fixed allometric coefficients for indacaterol and glycopyrronium.
RESULTS: Statistically significant effects of smoking, age, and sex on apparent 
clearance of indacaterol; smoking, and estimated glomerular filtration rate at 
baseline on apparent clearance and Japanese ethnicity on apparent central volume 
of distribution of glycopyrronium were identified.
CONCLUSION: Systemic exposure to indacaterol and glycopyrronium was shown to be 
dose-proportional and time-independent following inhalation either as 
monotherapies or FDC. None of the identified covariate effects was judged to be 
clinically relevant. There is no PK drug-drug interaction between indacaterol 
and glycopyrronium in its FDC.

DOI: 10.5414/CP202558
PMID: 27049057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. COPD. 2016;13(1):1-10. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1034256. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Efficacy and Safety of Umeclidinium Added to Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol 
in Patients with COPD: Results of Two Randomized, Double-Blind Studies.

Siler TM(1), Kerwin E(2), Singletary K(3), Brooks J(4), Church A(3).

Author information:
(1)a Midwest Chest Consultants, PC, St. Charles , Missouri , USA.
(2)b Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon , Medford , Oregon , USA.
(3)c GSK, Respiratory and Immuno-Inflammation, Research Triangle Park , North 
Carolina , USA.
(4)d GSK, Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, Stockley Park , Uxbridge , 
United Kingdom.

Combinations of drugs with distinct and complementary mechanisms of action may 
offer improved efficacy in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). In two 12-week, double-blind, parallel-group studies, patients 
with COPD were randomized 1:1:1 to once-daily umeclidinium (UMEC; 62.5 μg and 
125 μg) or placebo (PBO), added to twice-daily fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 
(FP/SAL; 250/50 μg). In both studies, the primary efficacy measure was trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at Day 85. Secondary endpoints were 
weighted-mean (WM) FEV1 over 0-6 hours post-dose (Day 84) and rescue albuterol 
use. Health-related quality of life outcomes (St. George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire [SGRQ] and COPD assessment test [CAT]) were also examined. Safety 
was assessed throughout. Both UMEC+FP/SAL doses provided statistically 
significant improvements in trough FEV1 (Day 85: 0.127-0.148 L) versus 
PBO+FP/SAL. Similarly, both UMEC+FP/SAL doses provided statistically-significant 
improvements in 0-6 hours post-dose WM FEV1 versus PBO+FP/SAL (Day 84: 
0.144-0.165 L). Rescue use over Weeks 1-12 decreased with UMEC+FP/SAL in both 
studies versus PBO+FP/SAL (Study 1, 0.3 puffs/day [both doses]; Study 2, 0.5 
puffs/day [UMEC 125+FP/SAL]). Decreases from baseline in CAT score were 
generally larger for both doses of UMEC+FP/SAL versus PBO+FP/SAL (except for Day 
84 Study 2). In Study 1, no differences in SGRQ score were observed between 
UMEC+FP/SAL and PBO+FP/SAL; however, in Study 2, statistically significant 
improvements were observed with UMEC 62.5+FP/SAL (Day 28) and UMEC 125+FP/SAL 
(Days 28 and 84) versus PBO+FP/SAL. The incidence of on-treatment adverse events 
across all treatment groups was 37-41% in Study 1 and 36-38% in Study 2. 
Overall, these data indicate that the combination of UMEC+FP/SAL can provide 
additional benefits over FP/SAL alone in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2015.1034256
PMCID: PMC4778542
PMID: 26451734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2018 Jan 24;5(1):38-45. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.5.1.2017.0163.

Effectiveness of Umeclidinium-Vilanterol for Protocolized Management of Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Exacerbation in Hospitalized Patients: A 
Sequential Period Analysis.

Chapin TW(1), Mann MA(2), Brown GL(3), Leitheiser TL(3), Anderson B(3), Leedahl 
DD(1).

Author information:
(1)1-Pharmacy Services, Sanford Health, Fargo, North Dakota.
(2)2-North Dakota State University College of Health Professions, Fargo.
(3)3-Respiratory Care Services, Sanford Health, Fargo, North Dakota.

Background: Bronchodilator therapy is a foundation of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation treatment. Although international 
guidelines recommend short-acting formulations given multiple times per day, 
long-acting formulations have not been adequately evaluated. The objective of 
our study was to determine the effectiveness of umeclidinium-vilanterol 
(UME/VIL), long-acting beta2-agonist/long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LABA/LAMA) as a once-daily alternative for treating COPD exacerbations in 
hospitalized patients. Methods: In this retrospective sequential period 
analysis, we reviewed electronic medical records of patients hospitalized for 
COPD exacerbations before (September 1, 2015 to February 29, 2016) and after 
(April 1, 2016 to September 30, 2016) incorporation of UME/VIL into our standard 
COPD protocol. Before implementation, patients received a daily anticholinergic 
plus twice-daily long-acting beta2-agonist therapy (tiotropium plus formoterol, 
n=65). After implementation, UME/VIL replaced the previous regimen (n=58). No 
other changes were made to the COPD protocol. The primary outcome was 30-day 
hospital readmission rate. Hospital length of stay, 30-day mortality, and cost 
of care were analyzed as secondary outcomes. Results: A trend toward increased 
30-day readmission rates in the post-intervention group (24.1% versus 10.8%, 
p=0.049) was no longer statistically significant after adjustment for severity 
of illness (based on case-mix index) and complications or comorbidities based on 
diagnosis-related group codes (adjusted odds ratio: 2.499; 95% confidence 
interval: 0.916-7.380; p=0.074). Conclusion: After adjustment for potential 
confounders,the implementation of a LABA/LAMA combination product was not 
statistically associated with an increased 30-day readmission rate but was 
associated with lower cost of care.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.5.1.2017.0163
PMCID: PMC5870738
PMID: 29629403

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest None of the authors have 
any real or apparent conflicts of interest, including no financial or consulting 
relationships, to disclose.


388. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Jan 18;11:123-32. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S94006. eCollection 2016.

Cost-effectiveness of combination therapy umeclidinium/vilanterol versus 
tiotropium in symptomatic COPD Spanish patients.

Miravitlles M(1), Gáldiz JB(2), Huerta A(3), Villacampa A(4), Carcedo D(4), 
Garcia-Rio F(5).

Author information:
(1)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitario de Cruces, CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Bilbao, Spain.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Oblikue Consulting, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.

PURPOSE: Umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI) is a novel fixed dose combination of 
a long acting muscarinic receptor antagonist (LAMA) and a long-acting beta 2 
receptor antagonist (LABA) agent. This analysis evaluated the incremental 
cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of UMEC/VI compared with tiotropium (TIO), from 
the Spanish National Health System (NHS) perspective.
METHODS: A previously published linked equations cohort model based on the 
epidemiological longitudinal study ECLIPSE (Evaluation of COPD Longitudinally to 
Identify Predictive Surrogate End-points) was used. Patients included were COPD 
patients with a post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 
≤70% and the presence of respiratory symptoms measured with the modified Medical 
Research Council dyspnea scale (modified Medical Research Council ≥2). Treatment 
effect, expressed as change in FEV1 from baseline, was estimated from a 24-week 
head-to-head phase III clinical trial comparing once-daily UMEC/VI with 
once-daily TIO and was assumed to last 52 weeks following treatment initiation 
(maximum duration of UMEC/VI clinical trials). Spanish utility values were 
derived from a published local observational study. Unitary health care costs 
(€2015) were obtained from local sources. A 3-year time horizon was selected, 
and 3% discount was applied to effects and costs. Results were expressed as 
cost/quality-adjusted life years (QALYs). Univariate and probabilistic 
sensitivity analysis (PSA) was performed.
RESULTS: UMEC/VI produced additional 0.03 QALY and €590 vs TIO, leading to an 
ICER of €21,475/QALY. According to PSA, the probability of UMEC/VI being 
cost-effective was 80.3% at a willingness-to-pay of €30,000/QALY.
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI could be considered as a cost-effective treatment 
alternative compared with TIO in symptomatic COPD patients from the Spanish NHS 
perspective.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S94006
PMCID: PMC4723026
PMID: 26848262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jun 5;10:1015-26. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S84436. eCollection 2015.

LANTERN: a randomized study of QVA149 versus salmeterol/fluticasone combination 
in patients with COPD.

Zhong N(1), Wang C(2), Zhou X(3), Zhang N(1), Humphries M(4), Wang L(4), Thach 
C(5), Patalano F(6), Banerji D(5); LANTERN Investigators.

Collaborators: Zhong N, Zhang N, Wang C, Zhou X, Huang W, Zhao Z, Yang J, Wen Z, 
Cai B, Li J, Huang K, Wang H, Wang G, Chang X, Chen P, Sun S, He Y, Wen F, Xiao 
Z, Zhou J, Ying K, Wang L, Huang Y, Wen G, Kuang J, Xiao Z, Huang M, Shi Y, 
Zhong X, Tang H, Bai C, Liu J, Li Q, Zhou X, Chen P, Kang J, Yan X, Han X, Shi 
M, Yang L, Li Z, Xin J, Jiang L, Perng DW, Kuo HP, Hsu JY, Wang CC, Lai RS, Chen 
SL, Salvado A, Lopez AM, Medina A, Garcia G, Wehbe L, Rey LB, De Salvo MC, 
Otaola M, Rolon MW, Aramayo N, del Olmo R, Gene R, Rivera F, Barros M, Saldias 
F, Sepulveda R, Soler T.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.
(2)Institute of Respiratory Disease, Xin Qiao Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University, Chongqing City, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Southwest Hospital, Third Military 
Medical University, Chongqing City, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(4)Beijing Novartis Pharma Co. Ltd., Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(6)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The current Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) treatment strategy recommends the use of one or more bronchodilators 
according to the patient's airflow limitation, their history of exacerbations, 
and symptoms. The LANTERN study evaluated the effect of the long-acting 
beta-agonist (LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) dual bronchodilator, 
QVA149 (indacaterol/glycopyrronium), as compared with the LABA/inhaled 
corticosteroid, salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC), in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD with a history of ≤1 exacerbation in the previous year.
METHODS: In this double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group study, 744 patients 
with moderate-to-severe COPD with a history of ≤1 exacerbations in the previous 
year were randomized (1:1) to QVA149 110/50 μg once daily or SFC 50/500 μg twice 
daily for 26 weeks. The primary endpoint was noninferiority of QVA149 versus SFC 
for trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at week 26.
RESULTS: Overall, 676 patients completed the study. The primary objective of 
noninferiority between QVA149 and SFC in trough FEV1 at week 26 was met. QVA149 
demonstrated statistically significant superiority to SFC for trough FEV1 
(treatment difference [Δ]=75 mL; P<0.001). QVA149 demonstrated a statistically 
significant improvement in standardized area under the curve (AUC) from 0 hours 
to 4 hours for FEV1 (FEV1 AUC0-4h) at week 26 versus SFC (Δ=122 mL; P<0.001). 
QVA149 and SFC had similar improvements in transition dyspnea index focal score, 
St George Respiratory Questionnaire total score, and rescue medication use. 
However, QVA149 significantly reduced the rate of moderate or severe 
exacerbations by 31% (P=0.048) over SFC. Overall, the incidence of adverse 
events was comparable between QVA149 (40.1%) and SFC (47.4%). The incidence of 
pneumonia was threefold lower with QVA149 (0.8%) versus SFC (2.7%).
CONCLUSION: These findings support the use of the LABA/LAMA, QVA149 as an 
alternative treatment, over LABA/inhaled corticosteroid, in the management of 
moderate-to-severe COPD patients (GOLD B and GOLD D) with a history of ≤1 
exacerbation in the previous year.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S84436
PMCID: PMC4461092
PMID: 26082625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 12;14:2121-2129. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S211854. eCollection 2019.

Economic impact of delaying initiation with multiple-inhaler maintenance triple 
therapy in Spanish patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Sicras Mainar A(1), Huerta A(2), Navarro Artieda R(3), Monsó E(4)(5), Landis 
SH(6), Ismaila AS(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Direction, Health Economics and Outcomes Research (HEOR) 
Department, Real Life Data, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Market Access Department, GlaxoSmithKline SA, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Medical Documentation Department, Hospital Germans Trias I Pujol, Badalona, 
Spain.
(4)Pulmonology Service, Hospital Parc Taulí, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)CIBERES - Ciber De Enfermedades Respiratorias, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Real World Evidence and Epidemiology Department, GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, 
UK.
(7)Value Evidence and Outcomes Department, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA, 
USA.
(8)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

PURPOSE: Guidelines recommend the use of triple therapy with an inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS), a long-acting beta agonist (LABA) and a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) to reduce the risk of future exacerbations in 
symptomatic COPD patients with a history of exacerbations. This study aimed to 
estimate COPD-related healthcare resource use and costs, and subsequent 
exacerbation rates, for patients initiating multiple-inhaler triple therapy 
(MITT) early (≤30 days) versus late (31-180 days) following an exacerbation, in 
a real-world clinical setting.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was an observational, longitudinal, retrospective 
study using electronic medical records from the Spanish database of the Red de 
Investigación en Servicios Sanitarios Foundation. Patients ≥40 years old with a 
confirmed COPD diagnosis who were newly prescribed MITT up to 180 days after an 
exacerbation between January 2013 and December 2015 were included. Patients were 
followed from the date of MITT initiation for up to 12 months to assess 
COPD-related health care resource use (routine and emergency visits, 
hospitalizations, pharmacologic treatment), exacerbation rate, and costs 
(€2017); these endpoints were compared between early versus late groups.
RESULTS: The study included 1280 patients who met selection criteria: mean age 
73 years, 78% male, and 41% had severe/very severe lung function impairment. The 
proportion of patients initiating MITT early versus late was 61.6% versus 38.4%, 
respectively. There were no statistically significant differences in baseline 
characteristics between groups. During follow-up, health care resource 
consumption was lower in the early versus late group, especially primary care 
and ED visits, leading to lower total costs (€1861 versus €1935; P<0.05). In the 
follow-up period, 28.0% of the patients in the early group experienced ≥1 
exacerbation versus 36.4% in the late group (P=0.002), with an exacerbation rate 
of 0.5 versus 0.6 per person per year (P=0.022), respectively.
CONCLUSION: Initiating MITT early (≤30 days after an exacerbation) may reduce 
health care costs and exacerbation rate compared with late MITT initiation.

© 2019 Sicras Mainar et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S211854
PMCID: PMC6748313
PMID: 31571848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ASI is employe of, and hold stocks in, 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. ASI is also unpaid part-time faculty at McMaster 
University, ON, Canada. SHL and AH were employees of GlaxoSmithKline plc. at the 
time of the study. ASM and EM received fees for their participation in the 
study. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


391. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Jan 1;199(1):43-51. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201801-0038OC.

Capturing Exacerbations of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease with EXACT. A 
Subanalysis of FLAME.

Frent SM(1)(2), Chapman KR(3), Larbig M(4), Mackay A(2)(5), Fogel R(6), 
Gutzwiller FS(4), Shen S(6), Patalano F(4), Banerji D(6), Kostikas K(4), 
Wedzicha JA(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Pulmonology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, 
Timisoara, Romania.
(2)2 European Respiratory Society Fellow at Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)3 Department of Medicine, Asthma and Airway Centre, University Health 
Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)4 Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)5 National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(6)6 Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, New Jersey; and.
(7)7 Editor-In-Chief, AJRCCM.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Jan 1;199(1):2-4.

RATIONALE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations accelerate lung 
function decline, reduce quality of life, and increase mortality. A subset of 
patients (n = 457) from the FLAME (Effect of Indacaterol Glycopyrronium vs. 
Fluticasone Salmeterol on COPD Exacerbations) study used the Exacerbations of 
COPD Tool (EXACT) to capture symptom-defined exacerbations.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effect of indacaterol/glycopyrronium versus 
salmeterol/fluticasone on symptom-defined exacerbations measured using EXACT, 
and to assess differences between these events and exacerbations requiring 
healthcare resource use (HCRU).
METHODS: All patients in FLAME used an electronic diary to record and detect 
symptom deteriorations; HCRU-related exacerbations were confirmed by 
investigators. In patients using the EXACT questionnaire, the onset, recovery, 
and magnitude of symptom-defined exacerbations were identified by changes in 
total scores relative to baseline. We analyzed the annualized rate and time to 
first symptom-defined (EXACT) exacerbation and assessed differences between 
symptom-defined and HCRU events in terms of number, severity, and concordance.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: A nonsignificant 17% reduction in the annualized 
rate of symptom-defined (EXACT) exacerbations (rate ratio, 0.83; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.60-1.14; P = 0.242) and a numerically longer time to first 
symptom-defined exacerbation were observed with indacaterol/glycopyrronium 
versus salmeterol/fluticasone (hazard ratio, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.56-1.03; 
P = 0.075). These results were consistent with data from the overall FLAME 
population. Of the symptom-defined (EXACT) events, 23.5% corresponded to HCRU 
events, and 22.2% of HRCU events were captured by EXACT (κ index, 0.24; 95% CI, 
0.15-0.33).
CONCLUSIONS: Regardless of the exacerbation definition used, our findings 
support the use of long-acting beta agonists/long acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonists as the preferred treatment option for patients at risk of future 
exacerbations. Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov 
(NCT01782326).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201801-0038OC
PMCID: PMC6353015
PMID: 30019939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Respir Res. 2017 Jan 6;18(1):8. doi: 10.1186/s12931-016-0491-8.

A randomized, seven-day study to assess the efficacy and safety of a 
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate fixed-dose combination metered dose inhaler 
using novel Co-Suspension™ Delivery Technology in patients with moderate-to-very 
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Reisner C(1), Fabbri LM(2), Kerwin EM(3), Fogarty C(4), Spangenthal S(5), Rabe 
KF(6)(7), Ferguson GT(8), Martinez FJ(9), Donohue JF(10), Darken P(11), St Rose 
E(11), Orevillo C(11), Strom S(12), Fischer T(12), Golden M(12), Dwivedi S(13).

Author information:
(1)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., 280 Headquarters Plaza, East Tower, 2nd Floor, 
Morristown, NJ, 07960, USA. creisner@pearltherapeutics.com.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, NOCSAE, 
Modena, Italy.
(3)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, OR, USA.
(4)Spartanburg Medical Research, Spartanburg, NC, USA.
(5)American Health Research, Charlotte, NC, USA.
(6)Lungen Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center North, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Grosshansdorf, Germany.
(7)Department of Medicine, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, MI, USA.
(8)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(9)Joan and Sanford I. Weill Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical 
College; New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(11)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., 280 Headquarters Plaza, East Tower, 2nd Floor, 
Morristown, NJ, 07960, USA.
(12)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., Durham, NC, USA.
(13)Pearl Therapeutics Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA.

Erratum in
    Respir Res. 2017 Aug 21;18(1):158.

BACKGROUND: long acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta-agonist 
combinations are recommended for patients whose chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) is not managed with monotherapy. We assessed the efficacy and 
safety of glycopyrrolate (GP)/formoterol fumarate (FF) fixed-dose combination 
delivered via a Co-Suspension™ Delivery Technology-based metered dose inhaler 
(MDI) (GFF MDI).
METHODS: This was a Phase IIb randomized, multicenter, placebo-controlled, 
double-blind, chronic-dosing (7 days), crossover study in patients with 
moderate-to-very severe COPD ( NCT01085045 ). Treatments included GFF MDI twice 
daily (BID) (GP/FF 72/9.6 μg or 36/9.6 μg), GP MDI 36 μg BID, FF MDI 7.2 and 
9.6 μg BID, placebo MDI, and open-label formoterol dry powder inhaler (FF DPI) 
12 μg BID or tiotropium DPI 18 μg once daily. The primary endpoint was forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s area under the curve from 0 to 12 h (FEV1 AUC0-12) on 
Day 7 relative to baseline FEV1. Secondary endpoints included pharmacokinetics 
and safety.
RESULTS: GFF MDI 72/9.6 μg or 36/9.6 μg led to statistically significant 
improvements in FEV1 AUC0-12 after 7 days' treatment versus monocomponent MDIs, 
placebo MDI, tiotropium, or FF DPI (p ≤ 0.0002). GFF MDI 36/9.6 μg was 
non-inferior to GFF MDI 72/9.6 μg and monocomponent MDIs were non-inferior to 
open-label comparators. Pharmacokinetic results showed glycopyrrolate and 
formoterol exposure were decreased following administration via fixed-dose 
combination versus monocomponent MDIs; however, this was not clinically 
meaningful. GFF MDI was well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: GFF MDI 72/9.6 μg and 36/9.6 μg BID improve lung function and are 
well tolerated in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01085045 . Registered 9 March 2010.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-016-0491-8
PMCID: PMC5216561
PMID: 28061907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Respir Med. 2019 Jun;152:37-43. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.04.018. Epub 2019 Apr 
26.

Use of aclidinium did not increase the risk of death in a noninterventional 
cohort study in the Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD), United Kingdom.

Rebordosa C(1), Aguado J(2), Plana E(2), Thomas S(3), Frances A(4), Lei A(4), 
García-Gil E(4), Nuevo J(5), Perez-Gutthann S(2), Castellsague J(2).

Author information:
(1)RTI Health Solutions, Av. Diagonal 605, 9-1, 08028, Barcelona, Spain. 
Electronic address: crebordosa@rti.org.
(2)RTI Health Solutions, Av. Diagonal 605, 9-1, 08028, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)RTI Health Solutions, 200 Park Offices Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
27709, United States.
(4)AstraZeneca, Avda. Diagonal, 615 2nd floor, 08028, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)AstraZeneca, Serrano Galvache 56, 28033, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Aclidinium bromide is an inhaled long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA). Although the initial potential increased cardiovascular and mortality 
risk among users of tiotropium has been ruled out by several observational 
studies, and clinical trials, there are still concerns related to the use of 
newer LAMA medications. The current study aimed to evaluate the risk of death 
among users of aclidinium and other LAMAs.
METHODS: We conducted a cohort and nested case-control study among patients with 
COPD aged 40 years or older to compare the risk of all-cause mortality among 
users of aclidinium and other COPD medications with the risk among users of 
long-acting beta agonists (LABA), in the Clinical Practice Research Datalink 
(CPRD) in the United Kingdom (2012-2017).
RESULTS: Mortality rates per 1,000 person-years were 32.9 for aclidinium, 43.8 
for tiotropium, 38.0 for other LAMA, 47.1 for LABA/ICS, and 38.1 for LABA. The 
RR of death compared with current use of LABA was 0.54 (confidence interval [95% 
CI], 0.40-0.72) for aclidinium, 0.96 (95% CI, 0.76-1.21) for tiotropium, 0.76 
(95% CI, 0.58-0.99) for other LAMA, and 1.08 (95% CI, 0.90-1.31) for LABA/ICS. 
Decreased risk for death observed among users of aclidinium was driven by 
overall current single use (RR = 0.41; 95% CI, 0.22-0.79), which corresponded to 
26% of the aclidinium users (<15 cases) and not by multiple use (RR = 1.02; 95% 
CI, 0.71-1.48).
CONCLUSION: Use of aclidinium, tiotropium, other LAMA, or LABA/ICS was not 
associated with an increased risk of all-cause mortality as compared with the 
use of LABAs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.04.018
PMID: 31128608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Am Assoc Nurse Pract. 2018 Aug;30(8):460-463. doi: 
10.1097/JXX.0000000000000053.

Tiotropium for asthma: A summary of current guidelines and a case study.

Shedd GC(1), Blenis RC.

Author information:
(1)Emory University Nell Hodgson Woodruff School of Nursing, Atlanta, Georgia.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The long acting muscarinic antagonist tiotropium 
received an indication for the treatment of asthma from the FDA in 2015.
METHODS: This paper summarizes much of the published findings on tiotropium and 
asthma and explores the heterogeneity of the asthma population vis-à-vis recent 
changes in guidelines for management of COPD. The accompanying case study 
provides an illustration of how tiotropium might be added to a patient's regimen 
appropriately.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Tiotropium has been shown in many 
studies to be beneficial to patients with asthma as an add-on medication. It 
should be considered as an agent by the clinician managing patients with both 
allergic and non-allergic asthma.

DOI: 10.1097/JXX.0000000000000053
PMID: 30085989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2015;125(11):859-66. doi: 10.20452/pamw.3168. Epub 2015 Oct 
30.

Current role of anticholinergic drugs in the treatment of asthma: key messages 
for clinical practice.

Pizzichini MM, Kerstjens HA, Pizzichini E.

Erratum in
    Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2015;125(12):954.

Anticholinergic bronchodilators such as tiotropium, a potent long-acting drug, 
are central to the symptomatic treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. Its role in asthma treatment has been recently investigated. This 
review critically evaluates documented evidence of clinical trials and assesses 
the therapeutic implications of anticholinergic drugs in asthma management. So 
far, the results of 10 Phases II and III randomized controlled trials evaluating 
the effect of adding tiotropium to the treatment of mild-to-moderate or severe 
asthma have been published. These trials had a duration of 4 to 52 weeks and 
involved 3368 subjects with mild-to-moderate asthma and 1019 subjects with 
severe asthma [corrected]. Also, 1 systematic review and 6 meta-analyses have 
appraised the results of published and unpublished trials investigating the role 
of tiotropium in asthma. The results of the trials in mild to moderate asthma 
showed that adding tiotropium to inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) was not inferior 
to adding long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs). In addition, the safety and efficacy 
of tiotropium were similar to those of salmeterol. The results of studies on 
severe asthma showed that adding tiotropium to a treatment with high doses of an 
ICS plus LABA results in further improvement in lung function, increases the 
time to the first severe exacerbation of asthma and to worsening of asthma, and 
improves asthma control. Except for dry mouth, the safety profile of tiotropium 
was similar to placebo both in moderate and in severe asthma. Adding tiotropium 
to an ICS or ICS plus LABA improves lung function, symptoms, and asthma control, 
and in severe asthma, it increases the time to exacerbations, with good safety 
profile. The effect seems independent of baseline characteristics such as age, 
level of bronchial obstruction, smoking status, allergic status, and bronchial 
reversibility.

DOI: 10.20452/pamw.3168
PMID: 26529261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Feb;30:16-21. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.002. Epub 
2014 Oct 30.

Roflumilast added to triple therapy in patients with severe COPD: a real life 
study.

Muñoz-Esquerre M(1), Diez-Ferrer M(1), Montón C(2), Pomares X(3), López-Sánchez 
M(1), Huertas D(1), Manresa F(1), Dorca J(4), Santos S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, 
Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hospital de Sabadell, Institut Universitari 
Parc Taulí, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hospital de Sabadell, Institut Universitari 
Parc Taulí, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de 
Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, 
Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades 
Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, 
Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades 
Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: 
saludsantos@bellvitgehospital.cat.

BACKGROUND: Roflumilast is used in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) patients with frequent exacerbations. However, limited information is 
available on its impact in a "real-life" population that may be receiving triple 
therapy.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of 
roflumilast in COPD patients already receiving triple therapy (long-acting 
β-agonist/inhaled corticosteroids and long acting muscarinic antagonist).
METHODS: Prospective registry that included COPD patients who were prescribed 
roflumilast added to triple therapy. The yearly rate of all COPD exacerbations 
before and after roflumilast and side effects related to the drug were 
registered.
RESULTS: Among 55 patients prescribed 500 mg of roflumilast. Only 50.9% (n = 28) 
completed 1 year of therapy (roflumilast group). A reduction of all 
exacerbations with roflumilast was observed (2.75 ± 0.29 vs. 3.57 ± 0.26; 
P = 0.022), with a particular benefit in patients with ≥4 exacerbations prior to 
initiating therapy (3.55 ± 0.51 vs. 5.00 ± 0.30; P = 0.034). Side effects 
(mainly gastrointestinal) and treatment discontinuation occurred in 69.1% and 
49.1% of the overall population, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Roflumilast, when added to triple therapy, reduces exacerbations in 
a "real-life" population of severe COPD patients with frequent exacerbations. 
However, side effects are more common and lead more frequently to 
discontinuation of therapy than has been reported in trials.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.10.002
PMID: 25445930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Respir Res. 2018 Nov 20;19(1):224. doi: 10.1186/s12931-018-0916-7.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of umeclidinium bromide/vilanterol 62.5/25 mcg 
versus tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 mcg in symptomatic patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: a Spanish National Healthcare System perspective.

Driessen MT(1), Whalen J(2), Seewoodharry Buguth B(2), Vallejo-Aparicio LA(3), 
Naya IP(4), Asukai Y(5), Alcázar-Navarrete B(6), Miravitlles M(7), García-Río 
F(8), Risebrough NA(9).

Author information:
(1)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, 
TW8 9GS, UK.
(2)ICON Health Economics, ICON plc, Abingdon, UK.
(3)Departamento de Evaluación de Medicamentos, GSK, Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(5)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, 
TW8 9GS, UK. yumiko.x.asukai@gsk.com.
(6)Hospital de Alta Resolución de Loja, Granada, Spain.
(7)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.
(9)ICON Health Economics, ICON, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Erratum in
    Respir Res. 2019 Jan 28;20(1):18.

BACKGROUND: A head-to-head study demonstrated the superiority of once-daily 
umeclidinium bromide/vilanterol (UMEC/VI) 62.5/25 mcg on trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) versus once-daily tiotropium/olodaterol 
(TIO/OLO) 5/5 mcg in symptomatic patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). This analysis evaluated the cost effectiveness of UMEC/VI versus 
TIO/OLO from a Spanish National Healthcare System perspective, using data from 
this study and Spanish literature.
METHODS: This analysis was conducted from the perspective of the Spanish 
National Healthcare System with a 3-year horizon as base case. A disease 
progression model using a linked risk equation approach was used to estimate 
disease progression and associated healthcare costs, and quality-adjusted life 
years (QALYs). The Evaluation of COPD Longitudinally to Identify Predictive 
Surrogate Endpoints (ECLIPSE) study was used to develop the statistical risk 
equations for clinical endpoints, and costs were calculated using a health state 
approach (by dyspnea severity). Utilities for QALY calculation were estimated 
using patient baseline characteristics within a regression fit to Spanish 
observational data. Treatment effect, expressed as change from baseline in FEV1 
was obtained from the head-to-head study and used in the model (UMEC/VI minus 
TIO/OLO difference: + 52 mL [95% confidence interval: 28, 77]). Baseline patient 
characteristics were sourced from Spanish literature or the head-to-head study 
if unavailable. A scenario analysis using only the intent-to-treat (ITT) 
population from the head-to-head study, and sensitivity analyses (including 
probabilistic sensitivity analyses), were conducted. Direct healthcare costs 
(2017 Euro) were obtained from Spanish sources and costs and benefits were 
discounted at 3% per annum.
RESULTS: UMEC/VI was associated with small improvements in QALYs (+ 0.029) over 
a 3-year time horizon, compared with TIO/OLO, alongside cost savings of 
€393/patient. The ITT scenario analysis and sensitivity analyses had similar 
results. All probabilistic simulations resulted in UMEC/VI being less costly and 
more effective than TIO/OLO.
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI dominated TIO/OLO (more effective and less expensive). These 
results may aid payers and decision-makers in Spain when making judgements on 
which long acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta-agonist (LAMA/LABA) 
treatments can be considered cost effective in Spain.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-018-0916-7
PMCID: PMC6245710
PMID: 30458866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: No 
ethics approval was required for the study as data were taken from previously 
conducted studies that had obtained ethical approval. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: 
Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: IPN and YA are employees of GSK and hold 
stocks/shares in the company. MTD was an employee of GSK and held stocks/shares 
in the company, at the time of the study. LAV-A is an employee of GSK. JW, BSB 
and NAR are employees of ICON Health Economics, who were contracted by GSK to 
provide data analysis for the study. JW was an employee of ICON Health Economics 
at the time of the study. No funding was provided to employees of ICON Health 
Economics for manuscript development. BA-N received personal fees and 
nonfinancial support from GlaxoSmithKline grants, personal fees, and 
nonfinancial support from Novartis AG, personal fees and nonfinancial support 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees and nonfinancial support from Chiesi, 
grants, personal fees, and nonfinancial support from Laboratorios Menarini, 
personal fees from Gebro, and personal fees from AstraZeneca outside the 
submitted work. In addition, BA-N has a patent (P201730724) pending. MM has 
received speaker fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, Menarini, Rovi, 
Grifols and Novartis, and consulting fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Gebro Pharma, CSL Behring, Novartis and Grifols. FG-R has 
received speaker fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Chiesi and Rovi, and 
consulting fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Grebo Pharma, 
AstraZeneca, Menarini, and Novartis. Accuhaler, Anoro, Ellipta, Flixotide, 
Seretide and Ventolin are owned by or licensed to the GSK group of companies. 
Handihaler, Respimat, Spiriva and Spiolto are trademarks of Boehringer Ingelheim 
International GmbH. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


398. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2017 Dec;17(12):2500-2506. doi: 10.1111/ggi.13115. Epub 
2017 Jun 28.

Poor adherence to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease medications in primary 
care: Role of age, disease burden and polypharmacy.

Vetrano DL(1)(2), Bianchini E(3), Onder G(1), Cricelli I(3), Cricelli C(4), 
Bernabei R(1), Bettoncelli G(4), Lapi F(3).

Author information:
(1)Deptartment of Geriatrics, Catholic University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institute and Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Health Search, Italian College of General Practitioners and Primary Care, 
Florence, Italy.
(4)Italian College of General Practitioners and Primary Care, Florence, Italy.

AIM: The aim of the present study was to assess the occurrence and determinants 
of poor adherence to pharmacological treatment in a cohort of primary care 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), paying special 
attention to the role of age, comorbidity and polypharmacy.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of COPD patients using the primary care Italian 
Health Search - IMS Longitudinal Patient Database. We assessed 1-year adherence 
to COPD maintenance pharmacotherapy (encompassing inhaled corticosteroids, 
long acting beta agonists and long acting beta agonistss). Poor adherence was 
defined as <80% of proportion of days covered by pharmacological treatment over 
a 1-year period.
RESULTS: Of 22 505 patients (mean age 67.3 ± 13.2; 41.3% women) entering the 
study, 17 486 (77.7%) were poorly adherent. According to multivariate analysis, 
poor adherence is less likely in older adults (OR 0.51, 95% CI 0.40-0.66), in 
non-smokers (OR 0.77, 95% CI 0.69-0.86) and in those with a history of alcohol 
abuse (OR 0.74, 95% CI 0.58-0.94). Higher comorbidity (OR 1.43, 95% CI 
1.13-1.80) was positively associated with poor adherence. Polypharmacy was 
associated with poor adherence only in patients aged ≥65 years (OR 1.34, 95% CI 
1.13-1.59). Finally, COPD severity was associated with a reduced likelihood of 
poor adherence (OR 0.20, 95% CI 0.07-0.61 for stage IV).
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings show that poor medication adherence is common 
in patients with COPD receiving long-term treatment. The interaction between age 
and polypharmacy, and the role of comorbidity suggest a pivotal role of 
biological age as a steering determinant of poor adherence. Geriatr Gerontol Int 
2017; 17: 2500-2506.

© 2017 Japan Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ggi.13115
PMID: 28656664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Aug;57:101808. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101808. Epub 
2019 May 30.

Cardiovascular safety of revefenacin, a once-daily, lung-selective, long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist for nebulized therapy of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: Evaluation in phase 3 clinical trials.

Donohue JF(1), Feldman G(2), Sethi S(3), Barnes CN(4), Pendyala S(5), Bourdet 
D(6), Crater G(7).

Author information:
(1)UNC School of Medicine, 130 Mason Farm Road, Chapel Hill, NC, 27514, USA. 
Electronic address: jdonohue@med.unc.edu.
(2)South Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, 151 Harold Fleming Court, 
Spartanburg, SC, 29303, USA. Electronic address: gfeld3232@aol.com.
(3)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, 3495 Bailey Avenue, 
Buffalo, NY, 14215, USA. Electronic address: ssethi@buffalo.edu.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, 901 Gateway Boulevard, 
CA, 94080, USA. Electronic address: CBarnes@theravance.com.
(5)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, 901 Gateway Boulevard, 
CA, 94080, USA. Electronic address: SPendyala@theravance.com.
(6)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, 901 Gateway Boulevard, 
CA, 94080, USA. Electronic address: DBourdet@theravance.com.
(7)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, 901 Gateway Boulevard, 
CA, 94080, USA. Electronic address: gcrater@theravance.com.

The cardiovascular safety of revefenacin, an anticholinergic indicated for the 
maintenance treatment of patients with chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD), 
was evaluated in phase 3 trials in patients with moderate to very severe COPD. 
No clinically meaningful changes in 12-lead electrocardiogram recordings were 
observed with up to 52 weeks of once-daily revefenacin 88 or 175 μg. In a pooled 
analysis of Studies 0126 and 0127, the incidence of prolonged QT interval 
corrected for heart rate using the Fridericia correction formula (QTcF; >450 
msec) for revefenacin 88 μg (n = 23, 5.6%) and revefenacin 175 μg (n = 23, 5.9%) 
was similar to that for placebo (n = 22, 5.3%). In Study 0128, the incidence of 
prolonged QTcF was similar in the revefenacin 175 μg (n = 25, 7.7%) and 
tiotropium (n = 26, 7.3%) groups and lower in the revefenacin 88 μg (n = 15, 
4.2%) group. There were four major adverse cardiac events (MACEs) in Study 0126 
(one, two, and one in the placebo, revefenacin 88 μg, and revefenacin 175 μg 
groups, respectively), no MACEs in Study 0127 and 26 MACEs in Study 0128 (9, 10 
and 7 in the revefenacin 88 μg, revefenacin 175 μg and tiotropium groups, 
respectively). In Study 0128, only one MACE was considered possibly/probably 
related to revefenacin (atrial fibrillation in the revefenacin 175 μg group). 
Thus, revefenacin may provide beneficial nebulized therapy for patients with 
COPD without further elevating their risk of cardiovascular events.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101808
PMID: 31152911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Oct 12;10:2177-83. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S89098. eCollection 2015.

A randomized multicenter Phase II study of perioperative tiotropium intervention 
in gastric cancer patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Fushida S(1), Oyama K(1), Kaji M(2), Hirono Y(2), Kinoshita J(1), Tsukada T(1), 
Nezuka H(2), Nakano T(2), Noto M(2), Nishijima K(2), Fujimura T(2), Ohta T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Kanazawa University Hospital, 
Kanazawa, Japan ; Digestive Disease Support Organization (DDSO), Kanazawa, 
Japan.
(2)Digestive Disease Support Organization (DDSO), Kanazawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium, a long-acting inhaled anticholinergic drug, has been 
widely used in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
However, the issue of whether perioperative tiotropium improves postoperative 
outcomes for gastric cancer patients with COPD remains unclear. Thus, the aim of 
this study was to determine the efficacy of perioperative tiotropium 
intervention for gastric cancer patients with COPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eighty-four gastric cancer patients with mild-to-moderate 
COPD were randomly assigned to receive perioperative pulmonary rehabilitation 
alone (control group) or pulmonary rehabilitation with 18 µg of tiotropium once 
daily (tiotropium group). The patients in the tiotropium group received 
tiotropium for more than 1 week before surgery and for 2 weeks after surgery. 
Spirometry was performed prior to group assignment and at 2 weeks after surgery. 
Postoperative complications, forced expiratory volume in 1 second, forced vital 
capacity, and the ratio of forced expiratory volume in second to forced vital 
capacity (%) were compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between the two groups in terms 
of age, body mass index, smoking, gastrectomy incision, operation time, and 
bleeding volume (all P>0.05). Postoperative complications and pulmonary 
functions did not differ significantly between the control and tiotropium 
groups. A subgroup analysis of gastric cancer patients with moderate COPD showed 
that perioperative tiotropium intervention significantly decreased the rate of 
postoperative complications compared with the control group (P=0.046). However, 
even after gastrectomy, many patients with mild COPD in both the control and 
tiotropium groups showed improved pulmonary function.
CONCLUSION: Although perioperative tiotropium intervention had no significant 
effects in gastric cancer patients with mild COPD, it may be beneficial in those 
with moderate COPD. Therefore, the next prospective study should further 
evaluate perioperative tiotropium intervention for gastric cancer patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S89098
PMCID: PMC4608619
PMID: 26491284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Pharmacol Res. 2015 Oct;100:117-26. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.07.033. Epub 2015 
Aug 1.

Characterization of V0162, a new long-acting antagonist at human M3 muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptors.

Heusler P(1), Cussac D(2), Naline E(3), Tardif S(4), Clerc T(5), Devillier P(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Centre de Recherche Pierre 
Fabre, 17 Avenue Jean Moulin, F-81106 Castres Cedex, France. Electronic address: 
peter.heusler@pierre-fabre.com.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Centre de Recherche Pierre 
Fabre, 17 Avenue Jean Moulin, F-81106 Castres Cedex, France. Electronic address: 
didier.cussac@pierre-fabre.com.
(3)Respiratory Pharmacology Research Laboratory, UPRES EA220, Hôpital Foch, 
Université de Versailles Saint-Quentin, 11 rue Guillaume Lenoir, F-92150 
Suresnes, France. Electronic address: upresea220@orange.fr.
(4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Centre de Recherche Pierre 
Fabre, 17 Avenue Jean Moulin, F-81106 Castres Cedex, France. Electronic address: 
stephanie.tardif@pierre-fabre.com.
(5)Centre de Recherche & Développement Pierre Fabre, 3 Avenue Hubert Curien 
BP13562, F-31035 Toulouse, France. Electronic address: 
thierry.clerc@pierre-fabre.com.
(6)Respiratory Pharmacology Research Laboratory, UPRES EA220, Hôpital Foch, 
Université de Versailles Saint-Quentin, 11 rue Guillaume Lenoir, F-92150 
Suresnes, France. Electronic address: p.devillier@hopital-foch.org.

The anticholinergic properties of the mequitazine enantiomer V0162 make it a 
drug candidate for the treatment of chronic obstructive airway diseases. Here, 
we compared V0162's in vitro pharmacological activity at recombinant human M3 
muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (hM3Rs) with that of other anticholinergics, 
using (i) a radioligand binding assay, (ii) a functional reporter gene assay and 
(iii) a bronchoconstriction inhibition assay on human bronchial preparations. 
V0162 had high affinity for hM3Rs, with a pKi varying from 9.01 after a 2 h 
incubation to 9.21 after 23 h. The other mequitazine enantiomer (V0114) was less 
potent. V0162 displayed rapid off-kinetics and a biphasic time course of 
binding. V0162 was found to be an antagonist behaving as an inverse agonist for 
hM3R-mediated reporter gene activation, with much the same efficacy as atropine, 
ipratropium and tiotropium. However, in contrast to ipratropium and atropine, 
V0162's inhibitory potency was only slightly affected by compound washout. V0162 
antagonized acetylcholine-mediated contractions in a human bronchial 
preparation; the pA2 values increased with the incubation time (up to 2 h). 
Moreover, there was a progressive increase in V0162's ability to inhibit 
electrically-induced contractions, which persisted after compound washout. In 
conclusion, V0162 is the most active mequitazine enantiomer at hM3Rs and shows a 
complex pattern of binding to the membrane compartment. These particular 
features may be of therapeutic value when persistent antagonism at hM3Rs is 
required.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.07.033
PMID: 26241178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2015 Dec;39(234):359-63.

[Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)--similarities and 
differences of the study group participating in the project of National Center 
for Research and Development project "Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD)--systemic disease, the biggest threat of XXI century"].

[Article in Polish]

Rubinsztajn R(1), Przybyłowski T(1), Karwat K(1), Maskey-Warzęchowska M(1), 
Chazan R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of the Internal Medicine, Pneumonology and Allergology, Medical 
University of Warsaw.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a significant clinical problem 
wich is dependent on many environmental factors.
THE AIM: of the study was to present a characteristic of examined group in the 
moment of including into the project.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Based on data obtained from studies conducted in six 
medical universities in Poland we present the characteristics of 445 patients 
(M-69%), median age 66.2 years, suffering from COPD with median disease duration 
7.7 years. The analysis included: age, education, risk factors, exacerbations 
and hospitalizations, comorbidities, severity of the disease, drug use and the 
results of selected tests and the quality of life of patients in relation with 
their place of residence.
RESULTS: Some differences were found among the participating centers. The 
youngest patients came from Wrocław and the oldest from Katowice. The largest 
number of patients with higher education were from Warsaw, while the lowest 
number was noted in Poznań; patients with primary education were most numerous 
in Lublin. Patients from Warsaw had the highest number of pack-years, smoking 
history was least relevant in patients from Wrocław. The highest values of 
spirometrical parameters were observed in Gdańsk, while the lowest--in Poznań. 
COPD treatment mainly comprised of long-acting beta2 agonists, followed by 
anticholinergic agents, more than 50% of patients were treated with inhaled 
glucocorticosteroids. The most common comorbidities were cardiovascular 
diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: The study group showed characteristics similar to those of other 
cohorts of patients with COPD described in the literature, but we found some 
differences between patients from different centers which participated in the 
study.

© 2015 MEDPRESS.

PMID: 26802687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Respir Med. 2016 May;114:123-6. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.03.019. Epub 2016 Apr 
1.

Genetic effects on treatment response of umeclidinium/vilanterol in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Condreay L(1), Huang L(2), Harris E(2), Brooks J(3), Riley JH(3), Church A(2), 
Ghosh S(4).

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. Electronic address: 
Lynn.Condreay@parexel.com.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park West, Middlesex, UK.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, King of Prussia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Treatment with long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) and long-acting 
muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
is standard, but response varies. We investigated genetic association with 
treatment response to umeclidinium (UMEC, a LAMA), vilanterol (VI, a LABA), and 
combination therapy.
METHODS: Data from 17 clinical trials (N = 6075) in patients with COPD receiving 
once-daily UMEC/VI (125/25mcg or 62.5/25mcg), UMEC (125 or 62.5mcg), VI (25mcg) 
or placebo were used. Genetic association with change from baseline in trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) ∼24 h post-dosing was assessed for: (i) 3 
beta-adrenoceptor (ADRB2) gene variants; (ii) 298 single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) with prior evidence of associations; (iii) human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 
alleles and (iv) genome-wide association study (GWAS) SNPs. Other endpoints were 
(i) reversibility at screening; and at baseline: (ii) FEV1; (iii) forced vital 
capacity (FVC), and (iv) FEV1/FVC ratio. Using linear regression, the inverse 
normal transformed residuals were pooled together, first across treatment group, 
then across studies for each monotherapy, then combination therapy and finally 
for every treated patient.
RESULTS: Of 6075 patients, 1849 received UMEC/VI, 1390 received UMEC, 1795 
received VI, and 1041 received placebo. None of the ADRB2 variants, HLA alleles 
or GWAS variants tested were associated with treatment response or baseline 
endpoints. Four SNPs in FAM13A (rs7671167, rs2869967, rs1964516, rs1903003) were 
significantly associated with baseline FEV1/FVC ratio (p < 3 × 10(-5)) after 
adjusting for multiple testing.
CONCLUSIONS: No genetic association was found with treatment response to UMEC or 
VI when administered as monotherapies or in combination.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.03.019
PMID: 27109822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Dec 10;10:2657-63. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S85324. eCollection 2015.

Adherence to GOLD guideline treatment recommendations among pulmonologists in 
Turkey.

Sen E(1), Guclu SZ(2), Kibar I(3), Ocal U(4), Yilmaz V(5), Celik O(6), Cimen 
F(7), Topcu F(8), Orhun M(9), Tereci H(10), Konya A(11), Ar I(11), Saryal S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Ankara University School of Medicine, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Pulmonary Diseases Department, Izmir Dr Suat Seren Surgery Training and 
Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Pulmonary Diseases Department, Istanbul Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Pulmonary Diseases Department, Adana Prof Dr Nusret Karasu Pulmonary Diseases 
Hospital, Adana, Turkey.
(5)Pulmonary Diseases Department, Yedikule Pulmonary Diseases and Surgery 
Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Pulmonary Diseases Department, Nihat Kitapçı Pulmonary Diseases and Surgery 
Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey.
(7)Pulmonary Diseases Department, Atatürk Pulmonary Diseases and Surgery 
Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(8)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Dicle University School of Medicine, 
Diyarbakir, Turkey.
(9)Pulmonary Diseases Department, Uskudar State Hospital, Istanbul, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(10)Pulmonary Diseases Department, Samsun Pulmonary Diseases and Thoracic 
Surgery Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(11)Pulmonary Diseases Department, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Low adherence to Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease (GOLD) guideline recommendations has been reported worldwide. There has 
been no study on the adherence to GOLD guidelines for COPD treatment in Turkey.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the rates of adherence to GOLD 2010 guidelines for 
COPD treatment among pulmonologists.
DESIGN: A multi-center, cross-sectional, observational study was carried out in 
eleven pulmonary outpatient clinics across Turkey. Adherence to GOLD was 
evaluated through hospital records. Demographic and clinical data were recorded.
RESULTS: Study included 719 patients (mean age: 62.9±9.7 years; males 85.4%) of 
whom 16 was classified as GOLD Stage I, 238 as II, 346 as III, and 119 as IV, 
and only 59.5% received appropriate treatment. Rates of guideline adherence 
varied across GOLD stages (I, 6.3%; II, 14.7%; III, 84.4%; and IV, 84%). Causes 
of inappropriate therapies were overtreatment (Stage I, 100% and Stage II, 
91.1%), undertreatment (Stage III, 3.3% and Stage IV, 10.9%) and lack of 
treatment (Stage II, 3.8%; Stage III, 2.3%; and Stage IV, 5.9%). The most 
preferred regimen (43.4%) was long-acting beta-agonist-inhaled 
corticosteroid-long acting muscarinic antagonist. Overall, 614 patients (89%) 
received treatment containing inhaled corticosteroid.
CONCLUSION: Pulmonologists in Turkey have low rates of adherence to GOLD 
guidelines in COPD treatment. Inappropriateness of therapies was due to 
overtreatment in early stages and excessive use of inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) 
in all disease stages.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S85324
PMCID: PMC4686224
PMID: 26715844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2020 Feb;13(2):103-113. doi: 
10.1080/17512433.2020.1717334. Epub 2020 Jan 29.

Aclidinium bromide and formoterol fumarate for the maintenance treatment of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Haley R(1), Gupta N(2), Sethi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Swedish Hospital, Chicago, IL, USA.

Introduction: Treatment options for COPD have evolved rapidly in the last decade 
and inhaled bronchodilators have largely supplanted the use of oral 
bronchodilators because of their increased efficacy and excellent safety with 
topical delivery to the lung. Recently added to the therapeutic armamentarium 
are fixed-dose combinations (FDC) of two long acting bronchodilators. LAMAs 
(long acting muscarinic antagonists) and LABAs (long acting beta agonists) are 
the main classes available and use different pathways to effectively produce 
bronchial smooth muscle relaxation.Areas covered: The most recent inhaled FDC 
LAMA/LABA to come to market is Aclidinium Bromide and Formoterol Fumarate. We 
searched databases of PubMed, Cochrane Library, and manufacturers' websites and 
retrieved all the randomized-controlled trials (RCTs) conducted with these drugs 
up to September 2019.Expert opinion: It is likely that FDCs will become the core 
of our COPD pharmacotherapy for all but the mildest COPD patients. These 
individual drugs have excellent efficacy and safety records for the maintenance 
treatment of COPD. Studies have demonstrated that twice daily treatment with 
aclidinium/formoterol resulted in significant improvement in lung function and 
an improved exercise tolerance when compared to placebo. Adverse effects are 
within the range of what is seen with other LAMA/LABA combinations.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2020.1717334
PMID: 31951778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jul 11;14:1539-1548. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S200846. eCollection 2019.

The effects of single inhaler triple therapy vs single inhaler dual therapy or 
separate triple therapy for the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Lai CC(1), Chen CH(2), Lin CYH(3), Wang CY(2), Wang YH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Chi Mei Medical Center, Liouying, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardinal Tien Hospital and School of 
Medicine, College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, 
Taiwan.
(3)Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and Sciences, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Medical Research Center, Cardinal Tien Hospital and School of Medicine, 
College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Jan 21;15:155-156.

BACKGROUND: This study aims to compare the effects of single inhaler triple 
therapy comprised of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs), long-acting beta-agonists 
(LABAs), and long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMAs) with dual 
therapies comprised of either LABA/LAMA, ICS/LABA or separate ICS/LABA plus LAMA 
triple therapy.
METHODS: The Pubmed, Embase, and Cochrane databases were searched up to October 
31st 2018. Only randomized controlled trials were included in the meta-analysis. 
The primary outcome was the rate of moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations.
RESULTS: Seven studies fulfilling the inclusion criteria were included in the 
meta-analysis. Single inhaler triple therapy was associated with a significantly 
lower risk of COPD exacerbation compared with LABA/LAMA (rate ratio, 0.69; 95% 
confidence interval [CI] 0.55 to 0.87, I2 =85%), and ICS/LABA (rate ratio, 0.81; 
95% CI 0.73 to 0.89, I2 =29%) dual therapy. Single inhaler triple therapy led to 
a more significant improvement in lung function and quality of life compared 
with LABA/LAMA and ICS/LABA dual therapy. Single inhaler triple therapy was 
associated with a higher risk of pneumonia compared with LABA/LAMA (risk ratio, 
1.38, 95% CI 1.14 to 1.67, I2 =0) dual therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of single inhaler triple therapy for COPD patients can 
result in lower rates of moderate or severe exacerbations of COPD as well as 
improved lung function and quality of life compared with dual therapy with 
LABA/LAMA or ICS/LABA.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S200846
PMCID: PMC6628970
PMID: 31371939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


407. COPD. 2016 Dec;13(6):686-692. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1182970. Epub 2016 Aug 
11.

Efficacy and Safety of Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) Versus 
Salmeterol/Fluticasone in Chinese Patients with Moderate-to-Severe Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: The Chinese Cohort from the LANTERN Study.

Zhong N(1), Wang C(2), Zhou X(3), Zhang N(1), Humphries M(4), Wang L(4), 
Patalano F(5), Banerji D(6).

Author information:
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research 
Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, 
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University , Guangzhou , 
Guangdong , China.
(2)b Institute of Respiratory Disease, Xin Qiao Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University , Chongqing City , Chongqing , China.
(3)c Department of Respiratory Medicine , Southwest Hospital, Third Military 
Medical University , Chongqing City , Chongqing , China.
(4)d Beijing Novartis Pharma Co. Ltd. , Shanghai , China.
(5)e Novartis Pharma AG , Basel , Switzerland.
(6)f Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation , East Hanover , New Jersey , USA.

Inhaled indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination (IND/GLY) is approved 
in over 80 countries, including the EU, Japan, Australia and Switzerland and the 
US. The LANTERN study evaluated the efficacy of IND/GLY compared with inhaled 
long-acting beta-agonist (LABA)/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) or 
salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC) in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD with a 
history of ≤1 exacerbation in the previous year. Here we present the efficacy 
and safety of IND/GLY versus SFC in the Chinese cohort from the LANTERN study. 
LANTERN was a 26-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, 
parallel-group study conducted in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD with a 
history of ≤1 exacerbation in the previous year. The patients were randomized 
(1:1) to once-daily IND/GLY (110/50 μg) or twice-daily SFC (50/500 μg). The 
primary endpoint was non-inferiority of IND/GLY versus SFC in terms of trough 
FEV1. Of the total 744 patients randomized in the LANTERN study, 598 (80.4%) 
were from Mainland China and randomized to IND/GLY (n = 298) or SFC (n = 300), 
and 553 (92.5%) completed the study. IND/GLY showed superiority over SFC with a 
statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in trough FEV1, 
FEV1 AUC0-4h, peak FEV1 and trough forced vital capacity (FVC) change from the 
baseline. Annualized rate of moderate or severe COPD exacerbations was 
significantly lower (43%) with IND/GLY compared with SFC (rate ratio: 0.57, p = 
0.015). Overall, adverse events were lower for IND/GLY (34.6%) versus SFC 
(43.1%). IND/GLY was superior in achieving bronchodilation versus SFC in a 
Chinese subgroup of patients from this study. Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: 
NCT01709903.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2016.1182970
PMID: 27715335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Dec 3;9:1426. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01426. eCollection 
2018.

The Cholinergic Pathways in Inflammation: A Potential Pharmacotherapeutic Target 
for COPD.

Yamada M(1), Ichinose M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

In COPD, the activity of the cholinergic system is increased, which is one of 
the reasons for the airflow limitation caused by the contraction of airway 
smooth muscles. Therefore, blocking the contractive actions with 
anticholinergics is a useful therapeutic intervention to reduce the airflow 
limitation. In addition to the effects of bronchoconstriction and mucus 
secretion, accumulating evidence from animal models of COPD suggest 
acetylcholine has a role in inflammation. Experiments using muscarinic 
M3-receptor deficient mice or M3 selective antagonists revealed that 
M3-receptors on parenchymal cells, but not on hematopoietic cells, are involved 
in the pro-inflammatory effect of acetylcholine. Recently, combinations of 
long-acting beta adrenergic agonists (LABAs) and long acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMAs) have become available for COPD treatment. These dual 
long-acting bronchodilators may have synergistic anti-inflammatory effects 
because stimulation of beta adrenergic receptors induces inhibitory effects in 
inflammatory cells via a different signaling pathway from that by antagonizing 
M3-receptor, though these anti-inflammatory effects have not been clearly 
demonstrated in COPD patients. In contrast to the pro-inflammatory effects by 
ACh via muscarinic receptors, it has been demonstrated that the cholinergic 
anti-inflammatory pathway, which involves the parasympathetic nervous systems, 
regulates excessive inflammatory responses to protect organs during tissue 
injury and infection. Stimulation of acetylcholine via the α7 nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor (α7nAChR) exerts inhibitory effects on leukocytes 
including macrophages and type 2 innate lymphoid cells. Although it remains 
unclear whether the inhibitory effects of acetylcholine via α7nAChR in 
inflammatory cells can regulate inflammation in COPD, neuroimmune interactions 
including the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway might serve as potential 
therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01426
PMCID: PMC6287026
PMID: 30559673


409. COPD. 2016 Dec;13(6):669-676. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2016.1170111. Epub 2016 May 
9.

Effect of Aclidinium Bromide on Exacerbations in Patients with 
Moderate-to-Severe COPD: A Pooled Analysis of Five Phase III, Randomized, 
Placebo-Controlled Studies.

Wedzicha JA(1), Agusti A(2), Donaldson G(1), Chuecos F(3), Lamarca R(3), Garcia 
Gil E(3).

Author information:
(1)a Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial 
College London , London , UK.
(2)b Institut del Tòrax, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, Universitat de Barcelona and 
CIBER Enfermedades Respiratorias , Barcelona , Spain.
(3)c AstraZeneca R&D Centre , Barcelona , Spain.

We investigated the effect of the long acting muscarinic antagonist aclidinium 
bromide on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations by pooling 
data from five randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group Phase III studies 
of 3-6 months' duration. Data were pooled from the aclidinium 400 μg twice-daily 
(BID) and placebo arms (N  =  2,521) and stratified by Global initiative for 
chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) group (A, B, C and D). Results showed 
that fewer patients experienced ≥1 exacerbation with aclidinium (any severity: 
12.5%; moderate to severe: 10.9%) compared with placebo (any severity: 15.7%; 
moderate to severe: 13.3%) and the odds of experiencing ≥1 exacerbation of any 
severity were reduced in patients receiving aclidinium (odds ratio  =   0.78, p  
=  0.039). Furthermore, aclidinium reduced the rate of exacerbations compared 
with placebo (any severity: rate ratio  =  0.79, p  =  0.026; moderate to 
severe: 0.80, p  =  0.044). The time to first exacerbation of any severity was 
delayed with aclidinium compared with placebo (hazard ratio  =  0.79, p  = 
 0.026) and there was a numerical delay in time to first moderate-to-severe 
exacerbation. Finally, the effects of aclidinium on exacerbations versus placebo 
were greater in patients in GOLD Groups B and D; however, it is of note that 
only 10.7% of patients were classified in Group A or C. In summary, the results 
indicate that aclidinium 400 μg BID reduces the frequency of COPD exacerbations 
compared with placebo and that these effects are greater in symptomatic 
patients.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2016.1170111
PMCID: PMC5152596
PMID: 27159613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Jun 2;10:985-93. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S80926. 
eCollection 2015.

Prognostic factors for clinical failure of exacerbations in elderly outpatients 
with moderate-to-severe COPD.

Wilson R(1), Anzueto A(2), Miravitlles M(3), Arvis P(4), Haverstock D(5), 
Trajanovic M(6), Sethi S(7).

Author information:
(1)Host Defence Unit, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, UK.
(2)University of Texas Health Science Center, South Texas Veterans Health Care 
System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(3)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, CIBER de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Loos, France.
(5)Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Whippany, NJ, USA.
(6)Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Acute exacerbations represent a significant burden for patients with 
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Each exacerbation 
episode is frequently associated with a lengthy recovery and impaired quality of 
life. Prognostic factors for outpatients that may predict poor outcome after 
treatment with antibiotics recommended in the guidelines, are not fully 
understood. We aimed to identify pretherapy factors predictive of clinical 
failure in elderly (≥60 years old) outpatients with acute Anthonisen type 1 
exacerbations.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT00656747.
METHODS: Based on the moxifloxacin in AECOPDs (acute exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease) trial (MAESTRAL) database, this study evaluated 
pretherapy demographic, clinical, sputum bacteriological factors using 
multivariate logistic regression analysis, with internal validation by bootstrap 
replicates, to investigate their possible association with clinical failure at 
end of therapy (EOT) and 8 weeks posttherapy.
RESULTS: The analyses found that the independent factors predicting clinical 
failure at EOT were more frequent exacerbations, increased respiratory rate and 
lower body temperature at exacerbation, treatment with long-acting 
anticholinergic drugs, and in vitro bacterial resistance to study drug. The 
independent factors predicting poor outcome at 8 weeks posttherapy included 
wheezing at preexacerbation, mild or moderate (vs extreme) sleep disturbances, 
lower body temperature at exacerbation, forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
<30%, lower body mass index, concomitant systemic corticosteroids for the 
current exacerbation, maintenance long-acting beta-agonist and long-acting 
anticholinergic treatments, and positive sputum culture at EOT.
CONCLUSION: Several bacteriological, historical, treatment-related factors were 
identified as predictors of early (EOT) and later (8 weeks posttherapy) clinical 
failure in this older outpatient population with moderate-to-severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. These patients should be closely monitored and 
sputum cultures considered before and after treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S80926
PMCID: PMC4459615
PMID: 26082623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Med Econ. 2018 Jun;21(6):629-638. doi: 10.1080/13696998.2018.1457532. Epub 
2018 Apr 24.

Clinical and economic outcomes associated with the use of fluticasone propionate 
250 mcg and salmeterol 50 mcg combination versus tiotropium bromide 18 mcg as 
initial maintenance treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in 
managed care.

Bell CF(1), Coutinho AD(2), Farrelly E(2), Lokhandwala T(2), Landsman-Blumberg 
P(2).

Author information:
(1)a GlaxoSmithKline , Research Triangle Park , NC , USA.
(2)b Xcenda , Palm Harbor , FL , USA.

AIMS: To examine the clinical and economic outcomes associated with the use of 
long-acting bronchodilators for initial maintenance treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) by analyzing health insurance claims data 
in the US.
METHODS: A retrospective, observational, matched cohort study used health 
insurance claims data (January 2008 to June 2013) to assess COPD-related 
outcomes for subjects aged ≥40 years. Subjects were assigned to a study cohort 
according to the first observed prescription fill for a long-acting 
bronchodilator (fluticasone propionate 250 mcg/salmeterol 50 mcg [FSC] or 
tiotropium bromide 18 mcg [TIO]). The analysis period for each subject comprised 
a 1-year pre-index date and 1-year post-index date. Primary outcome measure was 
total COPD-related costs per-patient per-year (PPPY) during the follow-up 
period. Secondary outcome measures included COPD-related exacerbations and the 
components of COPD-related costs.
RESULTS: Overall, 24,040 subjects were identified; the analysis sample consisted 
of 19,090 subjects (9,545 per cohort) with no significant differences between 
cohorts. Mean COPD-related total costs PPPY were numerically lower among the FSC 
cohort; however, the difference was not statistically significant ($2,224 
[±4,108] vs $2,352 [±3,721], p = .057). There was no difference between cohorts 
for COPD-related medical costs (p = .894). COPD-related pharmacy costs were 
significantly, yet modestly, lower in the FSC cohort compared with the TIO 
cohort ($1,160 [±1,106] vs 1,275 [±1,110], p < .001). There were no 
statistically significant differences in the rate or number of exacerbations 
between the matched cohorts.
LIMITATIONS: While propensity scoring achieved balance in baseline 
characteristics, some residual confounding unobserved in the database may be 
present.
CONCLUSIONS: Few clinical and economic differences between subjects initiating 
maintenance therapy with FSC or TIO were observed.

DOI: 10.1080/13696998.2018.1457532
PMID: 29577787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Oct 11;14:2343-2354. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S204388. eCollection 2019.

Improvement In Self-Reported Physical Functioning With Tiotropium/Olodaterol In 
Central And Eastern European COPD Patients.

Valipour A(1), Tamm M(2), Kociánová J(3), Bayer V(4), Sanzharovskaya M(5), 
Medvedchikov A(6), Haaksma-Herczegh M(6), Mucsi J(7), Fridlender Z(8), Toma 
C(9)(10), Belevskiy A(11), Matula B(12), Šorli J(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 
Karl-Landsteiner-Institute for Lung Research and Pulmonary Oncology, Krankenhaus 
Nord - Klinik Floridsdorf, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Lung Centre/Pneumology Department, University Hospital Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)Pneumological Outpatient Department, MephaCentrum, a.s., Ostrava-Poruba, 
Czech Republic.
(4)Biostatistics and Data Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 
Ridgefield, CT, USA.
(5)Respiratory TA, Boehringer Ingelheim RCV GmbH & Co. KG, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Medical Affairs Regional Center, Boehringer Ingelheim RCV GmbH & Co. KG, 
Vienna, Austria.
(7)Elizabeth Nursing Home, Gödöllő, Hungary.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(9)Department of Pneumology, Institute of Pneumatology "Marius Nasta", 
Bucharest, Romania.
(10)Department Of Pneumology, Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Bucharest, Romania.
(11)Department of Pulmonology, Pirogov Russian National Research Medical 
University, Pletnev Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(12)Department of Functional Diagnostics, Specialized Hospital of Saint 
Zoerardus, Teaching Facility of the Slovak Medical University, Nitra, Slovakia.
(13)Topolšica Hospital, Topolšica, Slovenia.

BACKGROUND: Reduced physical activity is associated with increased morbidity and 
mortality in patients with COPD. Studies suggest that treatment with the 
long acting muscarinic antagonist tiotropium and the long-acting beta-agonist 
olodaterol increases exercise capacity. This study assessed the effects of a 
fixed-dose combination (FDC) of tiotropium/olodaterol (delivered via Respimat®) 
on physical functioning in patients with stable COPD in a "real-world setting".
METHODS: An international, open-label, single-arm, non-interventional study 
conducted in nine countries measuring changes in self-reported physical 
functioning in COPD patients treated with tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg FDC for 
approximately 6 weeks. The primary endpoint was therapeutic success, defined as 
a minimum 10-point increase in the 10-question Physical Functioning 
Questionnaire (PF-10) score. Secondary endpoints included absolute change in 
PF-10 from Visit 1 to Visit 2, patient general condition (measured by 
Physician's Global Evaluation score) and patient satisfaction with the treatment 
and device (assessed by Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire at the end of the 
study period).
RESULTS: Therapeutic success was observed in 67.8% of 7218 patients (95% CI 
66.7, 68.8) in the final analysis set after approximately 6 weeks of treatment 
with tiotropium/olodaterol. Mean change in PF-10 score between Visit 1 and Visit 
2 was 16.6 points (95% CI 16.2, 17.0). Therapeutic success was 64.3% (95% CI 
63.0-65.6%) in patients with infrequent (≤1) and 76.1% (95% CI 74.3-77.9%) in 
patients with frequent (≥2) exacerbations (p<0.0001). Patient general condition 
improved as indicated by an improvement in Physician's Global Evaluation scores 
between visits. Most patients were very satisfied or satisfied with 
tiotropium/olodaterol treatment in general (81%), reported inhalation 
satisfaction (85%), and satisfactory handling of the device (84%). 1.3% of 
patients reported an investigator-defined drug-related adverse event.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with tiotropium/olodaterol led to an improvement in 
self-reported physical functioning in patients with COPD.

© 2019 Valipour et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S204388
PMCID: PMC6793952
PMID: 31632003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Arschang Valipour reports personal fees, 
non-financial support from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees from Novartis, 
Chiesi, and AstraZeneca, during the conduct of the study. Dr Valentina Bayer, Dr 
Maria Sanzharovskaya, Dr Alexey Medvedchikov are employees of Boehringer 
Ingelheim. Prof. Dr Zvi Fridlender reports personal fees and institutional 
support from Boehringer Ingelheim, during the conduct of the study. Prof Dr. Zvi 
Fridlender also reports personal fees from GSK, Novartis, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Teva, and Rafa, outside the submitted work. Dr Claudia 
Toma reports grants, personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, during the conduct 
of the study, personal fees, non-financial support from AstraZeneca, Berlin 
Chemie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Roche, Sandoz and Chiesi, personal fees 
from Amring, Bayer Pharma, Cipla, and Bristol Myers Squibb, and non-financial 
support from Actelion, Angelini, and Terapia, from outside the submitted work. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


413. Mayo Clin Proc. 2018 Oct;93(10):1462-1473. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2018.05.030. 
Epub 2018 Aug 10.

Risk of Severe Cardiovascular Events From Add-On Tiotropium in Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Liou JT(1), Lin CW(2), Tsai CL(3), Wang YH(2), Lai JH(2), Hsu YJ(4), Wang MT(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense 
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic 
of China.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Tri-Service General Hospital, 
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, 
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China; Graduate 
Institutes of Medical Sciences and Biochemistry, National Defense Medical 
Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(5)School of Pharmacy, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic 
of China. Electronic address: wmt@mail.ndmctsgh.edu.tw.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) from tiotropium 
added to inhaled long-acting beta agonists (LABAs) and inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICSs) in a nationwide population with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This nested case-control study included 65,966 patients 
with COPD treated with LABAs and ICSs identified from the Taiwan nationwide 
health care claims database from January 1, 2007, through June 30, 2011. Cases 
were all patients with a first primary diagnosis of ischemic heart disease, 
heart failure, stroke, or arrhythmia from inpatient or emergency care settings 
during follow-up, and each was matched with 4 disease risk score-matched 
controls from risk sets. The use of tiotropium in the year before the 
index/event date was measured, stratified by duration since therapy initiation, 
concomitant COPD medications, and dosage form. Conditional logistic regression 
models were used to estimate odds ratios of the CVD risk from add-on tiotropium 
therapy.
RESULTS: From the study cohort, with a mean age of 70.3 years (interquartile 
range, 61.8-79.4 years), 3188 CVD cases (incidence rate, 6.2 [95% CI, 6.0-6.4] 
cases per 100 person-years) and 12,349 matched controls were identified. The new 
use of tiotropium was associated with a 1.88-fold (95% CI, 1.44-2.46) increased 
CVD risk within 30 days of therapy initiation, and the association was sustained 
up to 60 days after treatment initiation (adjusted odds ratio, 1.71; 95% CI, 
1.08-2.70). The risk persisted across all tiotropium regimens, with a 
case-crossover analysis, and in comparison with new add-on theophylline therapy.
CONCLUSION: Tiotropium newly added to LABA/ICS combination therapy was 
associated with an increased cardiovascular risk in patients with COPD.

Copyright © 2018 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2018.05.030
PMID: 30104044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Respir Med. 2016 May;114:84-90. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.03.018. Epub 2016 Mar 
26.

The bronchodilator effects of extrafine glycopyrronium added to combination 
treatment with beclometasone dipropionate plus formoterol in COPD: A randomised 
crossover study (the TRIDENT study).

Singh D(1), Schröder-Babo W(2), Cohuet G(3), Muraro A(4), Bonnet-Gonod F(3), 
Petruzzelli S(4), Hoffmann M(5), Siergiejko Z(6); TRIDENT study investigators.

Author information:
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester, UK. 
Electronic address: dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(2)Pulmonology Department, Gelnhausen, Germany.
(3)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi S.A., Paris, France.
(4)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A., Parma, Italy.
(5)Pneumologicum, Practice for Internal Medicine and Pneumology, Hannover, 
Germany.
(6)Respiratory System Diagnostics and Bronchoscopy Department of Medical 
University in Bialystok, Poland and Private Practice Internal Medicine and 
Allergology, Bialystok, Poland.

This multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, crossover study 
aimed to determine the dose-response of the long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) glycopyrronium bromide (GB) when added to beclometasone dipropionate plus 
formoterol fumarate (BDP/FF) in patients with COPD. Patients received extrafine 
GB 12.5, 25 or 50 μg twice daily (BID) or placebo for 7 days via pressurised 
metered dose inhaler (pMDI), and extrafine BDP/FF via pMDI throughout the study. 
The primary objective was to demonstrate superiority of GB plus BDP/FF versus 
BDP/FF in terms of FEV1 area under the curve from 0 to 12 h (AUC0-12h) on Day 7. 
Secondary endpoints included: FEV1 AUC0-12h on Day 1; peak FEV1 and FVC on Days 
1 and 7; and trough (12 h post-dose) FEV1, FVC and inspiratory capacity (IC) on 
Days 1 and 7. Of 178 patients randomised (mean age 62.7 years, 
post-bronchodilator FEV1 48.9%), 172 (96.6%) completed. Mean FEV1 AUC0-12h on 
Day 7 was significantly higher (p < 0.001) for all GB doses plus BDP/FF compared 
to BDP/FF alone, with the difference for the 25 and 50 μg BID doses being 
clinically relevant (i.e., ≥100 mL). The results for the other spirometry 
endpoints were consistent with the primary endpoint. Adverse events were 
reported in 7.4, 5.7 and 8.0% of patients receiving GB 12.5, 25 and 50 μg BID, 
respectively, versus 11.0% of patients receiving BDP/FF alone. This study 
confirms the value of adding GB to BDP/FF to improve lung function in COPD 
patients. The dose of extrafine GB 25 μg BID was associated with the best 
efficacy/safety profile.
TRIAL REGISTERED AT: ClinicalTrials.gov.
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01476813.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.03.018
PMID: 27109816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Adv Ther. 2015 Jun;32(6):523-36. doi: 10.1007/s12325-015-0218-0. Epub 2015 Jun 
26.

Efficacy of Tiotropium + Olodaterol in Patients with Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease by Initial Disease Severity and Treatment Intensity: A Post 
Hoc Analysis.

Ferguson GT(1), Fležar M, Korn S, Korducki L, Grönke L, Abrahams R, Buhl R.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Livonia, MI, USA, 
garytferguson@msn.com.

INTRODUCTION: The once-daily long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) tiotropium 
and once-daily long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) olodaterol have been studied as a 
once-daily fixed-dose combination (FDC) in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Two large, 52-week, double-blind, parallel-group 
studies in patients with moderate-very severe COPD demonstrated that tiotropium 
+ olodaterol significantly improved lung function and symptoms versus the 
monocomponents. This post hoc analysis determined effects on lung function by 
prior LAMA or LABA maintenance treatment and initial disease severity.
METHODS: 5162 patients were randomized and treated with olodaterol 5 µg, 
tiotropium 2.5 µg, tiotropium 5 µg, tiotropium + olodaterol 2.5/5 µg, or 
tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 µg (all once daily via Respimat(®) inhaler). Primary 
efficacy (lung-function) end points were forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 
area under the curve from 0 to 3 h (AUC0-3) and trough FEV1 responses (i.e., 
change from baseline). Pooled data are presented for the following subgroups: 
prior maintenance treatment with LAMA or LABA, Global initiative for chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2 (predicted FEV1 50% to <80%) and 3 (30% to 
<50%)/4 (<30%), sex, age, and prior use of inhaled corticosteroids.
RESULTS: Tiotropium + olodaterol FDC improved lung function over the 
monocomponents in patients with GOLD 2 and 3-4 disease, irrespective of prior 
LAMA or LABA maintenance therapy; most comparisons between FDCs and their 
respective monocomponents were statistically significant (P < 0.05). FEV1 AUC0-3 
and trough FEV1 responses for the individual treatments were generally greater 
in patients with less severe COPD at baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 µg significantly improved FEV1 AUC0-3 
and trough FEV1 in all GOLD severity groups compared to olodaterol 5 µg and 
tiotropium 5 µg alone, irrespective of whether patients had received prior LAMA 
or LABA maintenance treatment. Improvements from baseline in lung function were 
generally greater in patients with less severe disease.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT01431274 and NCT01431287.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-015-0218-0
PMCID: PMC4486785
PMID: 26112656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


416. CMAJ Open. 2015 Jan 13;3(1):E15-22. doi: 10.9778/cmajo.20140040. eCollection 
2015 Jan-Mar.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in primary care: an epidemiologic cohort 
study from the Canadian Primary Care Sentinel Surveillance Network.

Green ME(1), Natajaran N(2), O'Donnell DE(3), Williamson T(4), Kotecha J(4), 
Khan S(5), Cave A(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Studies in Primary Care, Department of Family Medicine, Queen's 
University, Kingston, Ont. ; Department of Public Health Sciences, Queen's 
University, Kingston, Ont.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS.
(3)Division of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Queen's University, Kingston, Ont.
(4)Centre for Studies in Primary Care, Department of Family Medicine, Queen's 
University, Kingston, Ont.
(5)Department of Family Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alta.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is mostly managed 
within primary care, but there is little Canadian evidence from this setting. 
This study was undertaken to determine the prevalence of physician-diagnosed 
COPD in primary care practices, and the degree of comorbidity with other chronic 
conditions, and to assess patterns of medication prescribing.
METHODS: The Canadian Primary Care Sentinel Surveillance Network is a national 
"network of networks" whose member practices use electronic medical records 
(EMRs). At the time of the study, it included data from 444 physicians from 10 
networks in 8 provinces. We conducted an epidemiologic cohort study of all 
patients who had EMR data collected by the network at the end of 2012. Validated 
case-finding algorithms were used to identify cases of COPD. We used descriptive 
statistics and multivariate modelling analyses to calculate the prevalence of 
COPD, its association with key demographic factors and comorbidities, and 
patterns of medication prescribing.
RESULTS: The observed prevalence of COPD was 4.0% (10 043/250 346), which 
represents a population prevalence of 3.4% using age-sex standardization. 
Comorbidity was common, with prevalence ratios ranging from 1.1 for the presence 
of a single comorbid condition to 1.9 for 4 or more comorbid conditions. 
Anticholinergic agents (63%), short- (48%) and long-acting (38%) β-agonists and 
inhaled corticosteroids (41%) were the most commonly used medications.
INTERPRETATION: The prevalence of physician-diagnosed COPD in Canadian primary 
care practices was similar to that reported in other practice-based studies at 
about 3%-4%. Most patients had comorbid conditions and were taking multiple 
medications. EMR data may be useful to assess both the epidemiology and 
management of COPD in primary care practices.

DOI: 10.9778/cmajo.20140040
PMCID: PMC4382041
PMID: 25844366

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests:Andrew Cave has received 
honoraria for membership of an advisory committee for AstraZeneca. No other 
competing interests were declared.


417. Pharmacol Res. 2015 Dec;102:310-8. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.09.010. Epub 2015 
Nov 4.

Aclidinium bromide combined with formoterol inhibits remodeling parameters in 
lung epithelial cells through cAMP.

Lambers C(1), Costa L(2), Ying Q(2), Zhong J(2), Lardinois D(3), Dekan G(4), 
Schuller E(5), Roth M(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical University of 
Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Pneumology and Pulmonary Cell Research, Dept. Biomedicine and Internal 
Medicine, University & University Hospital Basel, CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Basel, CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, A-1090 
Vienna, Austria.
(5)Almirall GmbH, Breitenfurter Straße 113, A-1120 Vienna, Austria.
(6)Pneumology and Pulmonary Cell Research, Dept. Biomedicine and Internal 
Medicine, University & University Hospital Basel, CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: Michael.roth@usb.ch.

Combined muscarinic receptor antagonists and long acting beta-agonists improve 
symptom control in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) significantly. 
In clinical studies aclidinium bromide achieved better beneficial effects than 
other bronchodilators; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms are unknown. 
This study assessed the effect of aclidinium bromide combined with formoterol on 
COPD lung (n=20) and non-COPD lung (n=10) derived epithelial cells stimulated 
with TGF-β1+carbachol on: (i) the generation of mesenchymal cells in relation to 
epithelial cells, (II) extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, and (iii) the 
interaction of ECM on the generation of epithelial and mesenchymal cells. 
TGF-β1+carbachol enhanced the generation of mesenchymal cells, which was 
significantly reduced by aclidinium bromide or formoterol. The effect of 
combined drugs was additive. Inhibition of p38 MAP kinase and Smad by specific 
inhibitors or aclidinium bromide reduced the generation of mesenchymal cells. In 
mesenchymal cells, TGF-β1+carbachol induced the deposition of collagen-I and 
fibronectin which was prevented by both drugs dose-dependently. Formoterol alone 
reduced collagen-I deposition via cAMP, this however, was overruled by 
TGF-β1+carbachol and rescued by aclidinium bromide. Inhibition of fibronectin 
was cAMP independent, but involved p38 MAP kinase and Smad. Seeding epithelial 
cells on ECM collagen-I and fibronectin induced mesenchymal cell generation, 
which was reduced by aclidinium bromide and formoterol. Our results suggest that 
the beneficial effect of aclidinium bromide and formoterol involves cAMP 
affecting both, the accumulation of mesenchymal cells and ECM remodeling, which 
may explain the beneficial effect of the drugs on lung function in COPD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.09.010
PMID: 26546746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 18;14:447-456. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S191031. eCollection 2019.

Long-term cost-effectiveness of the fixed-dose combination of tiotropium plus 
olodaterol based on the DYNAGITO trial results.

Hoogendoorn M(1), Corro Ramos I(1), Baldwin M(2), Luciani L(3), Fabron C(4), 
Detournay B(4), Rutten-van Mölken MPMH(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)institute for Medical Technology Assessment (iMTA), Erasmus University 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands, hoogendoorn@imta.eur.nl.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim France, Paris, France.
(4)Cemka-Eval, Bourg-la-Reine, France.
(5)Erasmus School of Health Policy & Management (ESHPM), Erasmus University 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Combinations of long-acting bronchodilators are recommended to reduce 
the rate of COPD exacerbations. Evidence from the DYNAGITO trial showed that the 
fixed-dose combination of tiotropium + olodaterol reduced the annual rate of 
total exacerbations (P<0.05) compared with tiotropium monotherapy. This study 
aimed to estimate the cost-effectiveness of the fixed-dose combination of 
tiotropium + olodaterol vs tiotropium monotherapy in COPD patients in the French 
setting.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A recently developed COPD patient-level simulation model 
was used to simulate the lifetime effects and costs for 15,000 patients 
receiving either tiotropium + olodaterol or tiotropium monotherapy by applying 
the reduction in annual exacerbation rate as observed in the DYNAGITO trial. The 
model was adapted to the French setting by including French unit costs for 
treatment medication, COPD maintenance treatment, COPD exacerbations (moderate 
or severe), and pneumonia. The main outcomes were the annual (severe) 
exacerbation rate, the number of quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs), and total 
lifetime costs.
RESULTS: The number of QALYs for treatment with tiotropium + olodaterol was 
0.042 higher compared with tiotropium monotherapy. Using a societal perspective, 
tiotropium + olodaterol resulted in a cost increase of +€123 and an incremental 
cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of €2,900 per QALY compared with tiotropium 
monotherapy. From a French National Sickness Fund perspective, total lifetime 
costs were reduced by €272 with tiotropium + olodaterol, resulting in tiotropium 
+ olodaterol being the dominant treatment option, that is, more effects with 
less costs. Sensitivity analyses showed that reducing the cost of exacerbations 
by 34% increased the ICER to €15,400, which could still be considered 
cost-effective in the French setting.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with tiotropium + olodaterol resulted in a gain in QALYs 
and savings in costs compared with tiotropium monotherapy using a National 
Sickness Fund perspective in France. From the societal perspective, tiotropium + 
olodaterol was found to be cost-effective with a low cost per QALY.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S191031
PMCID: PMC6388779
PMID: 30863045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure MB is employed by Boehringer 
Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany. LL is employed by Boehringer Ingelheim 
France, Paris, France. CF and BD are employed by Cemka-Eval, Bourg-la-Reine, 
France. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


419. Can Respir J. 2018 Jan 21;2018:3464960. doi: 10.1155/2018/3464960. eCollection 
2018.

Tiotropium for the Treatment of Asthma: Patient Selection and Perspectives.

Chari VM(1), McIvor RA(1).

Author information:
(1)McMaster University, Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health, Hamilton, 
ON, Canada.

Asthma is a chronic disease of airway inflammation with a large global burden. 
Despite established, guideline-based stepwise therapy, a significant proportion 
of patients remain symptomatic and poorly controlled. As such, there is a need 
for additional safe, effective, convenient, and cost-effective therapies that 
can be broadly applied across a range of asthma phenotypes. Tiotropium is a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) that leads to bronchodilation by 
blocking endogenous acetylcholine receptors in the airways. Tiotropium has long 
been approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and it 
has recently been recognized for its safety and efficacy in improving lung 
function and controlling asthma. Evidence from several Phase III trials in the 
adult and paediatric population has shown that tiotropium is well tolerated and 
significantly improves a range of endpoints as an add-on treatment to ICS 
therapy, regardless of baseline characteristics and clinical phenotypes. 
Consequently, regulatory authorities worldwide have recently licensed tiotropium 
as the only LAMA approved for the treatment of asthma. This review provides an 
overview of safety and efficacy data and discusses the use of tiotropium in 
patients across the range of asthma severities, ages, and phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/3464960
PMCID: PMC5833870
PMID: 29670674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 4;14:2047-2060. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S213520. eCollection 2019.

Evaluation of rescue medication use and medication adherence receiving 
umeclidinium/vilanterol versus tiotropium bromide/olodaterol.

Moretz C(1), Bengtson LG(2), Sharpsten L(2), Koep E(2), Le L(2), Tong J(2), 
Stanford RH(1), Hahn B(1), Ray R(1).

Author information:
(1)Glaxo Smith Kline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Optum, Eden Prairie, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND: This was the first real-world head-to-head study comparing inhaled 
long acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta-agonist fixed-dose combination 
treatments as maintenance therapy.
METHODS: Retrospective observational study including commercial, Medicare 
Advantage with Part D or Part D-only enrollees aged ≥40 years from the Optum 
Research Database. Patients initiated umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI) or 
tiotropium bromide/olodaterol (TIO/OLO) between June 1, 2015 and November 30, 
2016 (index date) with 12 months of pre- and post-index continuous enrollment. 
Outcomes were modeled following the inverse probability of treatment weighting. 
The primary endpoint, rescue medication use, was modeled using weighted ordinary 
least squares regression with bootstrapped variance estimation. Intent-to-treat 
analysis evaluated non-inferiority and superiority of UMEC/VI to TIO/OLO with 
thresholds of 0.30 and 0 units, respectively. On-treatment sensitivity analysis 
evaluated the superiority of UMEC/VI to TIO/OLO for rescue medication use. The 
secondary endpoint, medication adherence (proportion of days covered [PDC]≥80%), 
was evaluated using weighted logistic regression. Post hoc weighted Cox 
proportional hazards regression analysis evaluated escalation to multiple 
inhaler triple therapy (MITT).
RESULTS: The study population included 14,324 patients; 9549 initiated UMEC/VI 
and 4775 initiated TIO/OLO. During the 12-month post-index period, UMEC/VI 
initiators used 0.16 fewer adjusted mean units of rescue medication than TIO/OLO 
initiators (95% CI: -0.28, -0.04), meeting pre-specified non-inferiority 
(P<0.001) and superiority (P=0.005) criteria; the on-treatment sensitivity 
analysis for superiority was not statistically significant. Significantly more 
UMEC/VI than TIO/OLO initiators (28.6% vs 22.7%; P<0.001) achieved a clinically 
meaningful level (PDC≥80%) of medication adherence. The adjusted risk of 
escalation to MITT was similar between treatment groups (HR=0.93; 95% CI: 0.81, 
1.06; P=0.268).
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI was superior to TIO/OLO for rescue medication use and 
UMEC/VI initiators had better medication adherence than TIO/OLO initiators. This 
study supports findings from a head-to-head trial that demonstrated significant, 
clinically meaningful improvements in lung function with UMEC/VI versus TIO/OLO.

© 2019 Moretz et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S213520
PMCID: PMC6732570
PMID: 31564852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CM, BH, RR, and RHS are employees of GSK and 
hold stocks/shares in GSK. LGSB, EK, LL, and JT are employees of Optum. EK 
reports grant from GlaxoSmithKline, during the conduct of the study. LS was an 
employee of Optum at the time of the study, which was contracted by GSK to 
conduct the study. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


421. Adv Ther. 2019 Sep;36(9):2434-2449. doi: 10.1007/s12325-019-01015-3. Epub 2019 
Jul 2.

A Randomized, Double-Blind, Double-Dummy Study of Glycopyrrolate/Formoterol 
Fumarate Metered Dose Inhaler Relative to Umeclidinium/Vilanterol Dry Powder 
Inhaler in COPD.

Maltais F(1), Ferguson GT(2), Feldman GJ(3), Deslee G(4), Bourdin A(5), 
Fjällbrant H(6), Siwek-Posłuszna A(7), Jenkins MA(8), Martin UJ(9).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie 
de Québec, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada. Francois.Maltais@med.ulaval.ca.
(2)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(3)S. Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Spartanburg, SC, USA.
(4)Hôpital Maison Blanche, INSERM U1250, Service des Maladies Respiratoires, CHU 
de Reims, Reims, France.
(5)CHU Montpellier, PhyMedExp, INSERM, CNRS, Université de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(6)AstraZeneca Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.
(7)AstraZeneca, Warsaw, Poland.
(8)AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(9)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI), 
formulated using co-suspension delivery technology, is the only approved 
fixed-dose combination long acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting beta-agonist 
(LAMA/LABA) delivered via MDI. Direct comparisons of GFF MDI versus other 
LAMA/LABAs have not previously been performed. We assessed the efficacy and 
safety of GFF MDI relative to umeclidinium/vilanterol dry powder inhaler (UV 
DPI) in patients with moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD).
METHODS: In this phase IIIb randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, multicenter, 
24-week study, patients received GFF MDI 18/9.6 μg (equivalent to 
glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate dihydrate 14.4/10 μg; two inhalations per 
dose, twice-daily; n = 559) or UV DPI 62.5/25 μg (one inhalation, once-daily; 
n = 560). Primary endpoints were change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) and peak change from baseline in FEV1 
within 2 h post-dose, both over 24 weeks. Additional lung function, symptom and 
safety endpoints were also assessed.
RESULTS: For the primary endpoints, GFF MDI was non-inferior to UV DPI (using a 
margin of - 50 mL) for peak FEV1 (least squares mean [LSM] difference - 3.4 mL, 
97.5% confidence interval [CI] - 32.8, 25.9) but not for trough FEV1 (LSM 
difference - 87.2 mL; - 117.0, - 57.4). GFF MDI was nominally superior to UV DPI 
for onset of action (p < 0.0001) and was nominally non-inferior to UV DPI for 
all symptom endpoints (Transition Dyspnea Index focal score, Early 
Morning/Night-Time Symptoms COPD instrument scores, and COPD Assessment Test 
score). Exacerbation and safety findings were similar between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Over 24 weeks of treatment, GFF MDI was non-inferior to UV DPI for 
peak FEV1, but not for morning pre-dose trough FEV1. GFF MDI had a faster onset 
of action versus UV DPI. There were no clinically meaningful differences between 
treatments in symptom endpoints. Both treatments were well tolerated with 
similar safety profiles.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT03162055 (Clinicaltrials.gov) FUNDING: AstraZeneca.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-019-01015-3
PMID: 31267366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Rambam Maimonides Med J. 2019 Jan 28;10(1):e0006. doi: 10.5041/RMMJ.10357.

Management of Breathlessness in Palliative Care: Inhalers and Dyspnea-A 
Literature Review.

Senderovich H(1)(2), Yendamuri A(3).

Author information:
(1)Geriatrics & Pain Medicine & Palliative Care Physician, Baycrest Health 
Sciences, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Assistant Professor at the Department of Family and Community Medicine, 
Division of Palliative Care, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Baycrest Health Sciences, Toronto, ON, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Dyspnea is prominently observed in palliative care (PC). Dyspnea 
can be multifactorial, primarily caused by obstructive or restrictive lung 
diseases or secondarily induced by various comorbidities. Numerous interventions 
exist, with route of administration and efficacy requiring further discussion. 
Despite opioids being the first line of treatment, their adverse effects lead to 
reluctance on the side of patients to take them, creating limitations in patient 
management planning.
OBJECTIVES: This paper reviews and highlights the role of inhalers for dyspnea 
management in PC.
METHODS: The CINAHL, CENTRAL, and OVID databases were searched for scholarly 
articles on the role of inhalers in dyspnea management from 1998 to the present. 
A grey literature Internet search was also performed via Google, the World 
Health Organization, and CareSearch. Twenty-five articles relevant to the 
subject at hand were located and summarized. The Cochrane Systematic Reviews of 
Health Promotion and Public Health Interventions Handbook was consulted for 
structuring.
RESULT: Isolated bronchodilators can be effective in dyspnea management. 
However, combination with opioids leads to a 52% reduction of dyspnea, 
demonstrating efficacy of their combined use. There is a role for conventional 
inhalers not only in patients afflicted with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, but also in those where obstruction is reversible, and in cases of 
dyspnea not yet diagnosed.
CONCLUSION: Inhalers can be utilized as adjuvant therapy to opioids, to limit 
opioid use, augment responses to dyspnea, and/or minimize opioid side effects, 
especially in opioid-naïve patients. Correct administration can increase the 
efficacy of short-acting beta-agonists, long-acting beta-agonists, short- and 
long acting beta agonists agents, and inhaled corticosteroids, achieving 
reduction and alleviation of dyspnea.

DOI: 10.5041/RMMJ.10357
PMCID: PMC6363369
PMID: 30332384

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.


423. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 May 9;11:971-9. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S102962. 
eCollection 2016.

A randomized, parallel-group study to evaluate the efficacy of 
umeclidinium/vilanterol 62.5/25 μg on health-related quality of life in patients 
with COPD.

Siler TM(1), Donald AC(2), O'Dell D(3), Church A(2), Fahy WA(4).

Author information:
(1)Midwest Chest Consultants, PC, St Charles, MO, USA.
(2)GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA; Pearl Therapeutics, Inc., Durham, NC, 
USA.
(4)GSK, Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, Stockley Park, Middlesex, UK.

BACKGROUND: The combination of the inhaled muscarinic antagonist umeclidinium 
(UMEC) with the long-acting beta-agonist vilanterol (VI) has been shown to provide 
significant improvements in lung function compared with UMEC, VI, or placebo 
(PBO) in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study 
was specifically designed to support these findings by assessing health-related 
quality of life and symptomatic outcomes in a similar population.
METHODS: This was a 12-week multicenter, randomized, double-blind, 
parallel-group, placebo-controlled study. Eligible patients were randomized 1:1 
to receive once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg (via ELLIPTA(®) dry powder inhaler) or 
PBO for 12 weeks. The primary endpoint was St George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) total score at day 84. Secondary efficacy endpoints included rescue 
albuterol use (puffs/day) over weeks 1-12 and trough forced expiratory volume in 
1 second on day 84. Adverse events were also assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 496 patients were included in the intent-to-treat population 
in the UMEC/VI (n=248) and PBO (n=248) treatment groups. UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg 
provided a significant and clinically meaningful improvement in SGRQ total score 
at day 84 versus PBO (difference between treatments in SGRQ total score change 
from baseline: -4.03 [95% confidence interval {CI}: -6.28, -1.79]; P<0.001). 
UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg resulted in a statistically significant reduction in rescue 
albuterol use versus PBO (-0.7 puffs/day [95% CI: -1.1, -0.4]; P<0.001). UMEC/VI 
62.5/25 μg provided a significant and clinically meaningful improvement in 
trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second on day 84 versus PBO (122 mL [95% 
CI: 71, 172]; P<0.001). The incidence of adverse events was similar between 
treatments (32% and 30% of patients in the UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg and PBO groups, 
respectively).
CONCLUSION: The results of this study demonstrate that treatment with UMEC/VI 
62.5/25 μg provides clinically important improvements in SGRQ and rescue 
medication use versus PBO in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S102962
PMCID: PMC4869636
PMID: 27274218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


424. BMC Pulm Med. 2016 Jun 14;16(1):95. doi: 10.1186/s12890-016-0256-7.

Effects of indacaterol/glycopyrronium (QVA149) on lung hyperinflation and 
physical activity in patients with moderate to severe COPD: a randomised, 
placebo-controlled, crossover study (The MOVE Study).

Watz H(1), Mailänder C(2), Baier M(2), Kirsten A(3).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research 
Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Woehrendamm 80, 
D-22927, Grosshansdorf, Germany. H.Watz@pulmoresearch.de.
(2)Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nuremberg, Germany.
(3)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research 
Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Woehrendamm 80, 
D-22927, Grosshansdorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Physical activity limitation is common in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), and is associated with worse health status, and 
increased hospitalisation and mortality. Long-acting bronchodilators, either 
alone or in combination, have been shown to improve exercise intolerance. 
However, none of these studies were designed with physical activity as primary 
outcome. This study assessed the effect of indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed dose 
combination (IND/GLY) 110/50 μg once daily (OD) versus placebo on lung 
hyperinflation (inspiratory capacity [IC]) and physical activity in patients 
with moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: In this multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
crossover study, patients received IND/GLY or placebo OD in two 21-day treatment 
periods (14-day washout between periods). Eligible patients were ≥40 years of 
age, current or ex-smokers (smoking history ≥10 pack-years), with 
post-salbutamol forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 40-80 % predicted, and 
FEV1:forced vital capacity <0.70. The co-primary endpoints were peak IC after 
21 days and average daily activity-related energy expenditure. Key secondary 
endpoints were average number of steps per day and the duration of at least 
moderate activity per day. Peak IC and FEV1 on Day 1, and trough IC and FEV1 
after 21 days were other secondary endpoints.
RESULTS: A total of 194 patients were randomised (65.5 % male, mean age 
62.8 years, mean FEV1 61.6 % predicted), with 183 (94.3 %) completing the study. 
Compared with placebo, IND/GLY significantly increased peak IC after 21 days 
(difference 202 mL, p < 0.0001), activity-related energy expenditure (difference 
36.7 kcal/day, p = 0.040), and the average number of steps per day (difference 
358, p = 0.029), with a trend towards an improvement in the duration of at least 
moderate activity (difference 4.4 min, p = 0.264). IND/GLY was associated with 
statistically significant improvements versus placebo in peak IC and FEV1 on Day 
1, and trough IC and FEV1 after 21 days. The incidence of treatment-emergent 
adverse events was 22.8 % with IND/GLY and 22.9 % with placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, compared with placebo, IND/GLY reduced 
hyperinflation, and, despite no patient education or lifestyle advice, improved 
daily physical activity levels. This suggests that IND/GLY has the potential to 
impact two of the main clinical concerns in the care of patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov number: NCT01996319 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-016-0256-7
PMCID: PMC4908762
PMID: 27301417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Clin Drug Investig. 2015 Oct;35(10):685-8. doi: 10.1007/s40261-015-0322-6.

Is Blood Eosinophil Count a Predictor of Response to Bronchodilators in Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease? Results from Post Hoc Subgroup Analyses.

Iqbal A(1), Barnes NC(2)(3), Brooks J(4).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Franchise Medical, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, 5.3317, Research Triangle 
Park, NC, USA.
(2)Respiratory Medical Franchise, GSK, Stockley Park West, 1-3 Ironbridge Road, 
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1BT, UK. neil.c.barnes@gsk.com.
(3)The William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK. neil.c.barnes@gsk.com.
(4)Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, GSK, Stockley Park West, 1-3 
Ironbridge Road, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1BT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients with blood 
eosinophil (EOS) count ≥ 2% benefit from exacerbation reductions with inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICSs). We conducted post hoc analyses to determine if EOS count 
≥ 2% is a marker for greater responsiveness to the bronchodilators umeclidinium 
(UMEC; long acting muscarinic antagonist), vilanterol (VI; long-acting 
beta-agonist) or UMEC/VI combination.
METHODS: Effects of once-daily UMEC/VI 62.5/25, UMEC 62.5 and VI 25 µg versus 
placebo on trough forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), Transition 
Dyspnoea Index (TDI), St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scores and 
adverse event (AE) incidences in four completed, 6-month studies were assessed 
by EOS subgroup. Trough FEV1 was also evaluated by ICS use and EOS subgroup. 
Analyses were performed using a repeated measures model.
RESULTS: At baseline, 2437 of 4647 (52%) patients had EOS count ≥ 2%. Overall, ≈ 
50% of patients used ICSs. At day 169, no notable variations were observed in 
trough FEV1 least squares mean differences between EOS subgroups versus placebo 
for UMEC/VI, UMEC and VI; results according to ICS use were similar. No 
differences were reported between EOS subgroups in TDI and SGRQ scores on day 
168, or for incidences of AEs, serious AEs and AEs leading to withdrawal.
CONCLUSIONS: Response to UMEC/VI, UMEC and VI in terms of trough FEV1, dyspnoea 
and health-related quality of life was similar for COPD patients with baseline 
EOS counts ≥ 2 or <2%. EOS count did not appear to predict bronchodilator 
response in either ICS users or non-users.

DOI: 10.1007/s40261-015-0322-6
PMCID: PMC4579251
PMID: 26329916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Dec;35:42-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.11.001. Epub 
2015 Nov 6.

Faster reduction in hyperinflation and improvement in lung ventilation 
inhomogeneity promoted by aclidinium compared to glycopyrronium in severe stable 
COPD patients. A randomized crossover study.

Santus P(1), Radovanovic D(2), Di Marco F(3), Raccanelli R(4), Valenti V(5), 
Centanni S(6).

Author information:
(1)Health Science Department, University of Milan - Pulmonary Rehabilitation 
Unit, Fondazione, Salvatore Maugeri, IRCCS - Scientific Institute of Milan, 
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: pierachille.santus@unimi.it.
(2)Health Science Department, University of Milan - Pulmonary Rehabilitation 
Unit, Fondazione, Salvatore Maugeri, IRCCS - Scientific Institute of Milan, 
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: danko86@hotmail.com.
(3)Health Science Department, University of Milan - Respiratory Unit, San Paolo 
Hospital, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: fabiano.dimarco@unimi.it.
(4)Health Science Department, University of Milan - Pulmonary Rehabilitation 
Unit, Fondazione, Salvatore Maugeri, IRCCS - Scientific Institute of Milan, 
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: rita.raccanelli@fsm.it.
(5)Department of Health Bioscience, University of Milan - Respiratory Unit, 
Policlinico di San Donato, IRCCS - San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy. Electronic 
address: vincenzo.valenti@unimi.it.
(6)Health Science Department, University of Milan - Respiratory Unit, San Paolo 
Hospital, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: stefano.centanni@unimi.it.

Standard spyrometric assessment in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
only evaluates bronchial obstruction. However, airflow limitation and 
hyperinflation are the main pathophysiological factors responsible for dyspnoea 
and reduced exercise tolerance in patients with COPD. This study evaluated the 
effects of aclidinium bromide 400 μg and glycopyrronium bromide 50 μg on these 
parameters. Patients with stable severe/very severe COPD were randomized in this 
double-blind, double-dummy, crossover, Phase IV study. Patients received single 
doses of each drug on separate days. Primary endpoints were changes in residual 
volume (RV) and intra-thoracic gas volume (ITGV), assessed by full-body 
plethysmography. Other endpoints included changes variations in lung ventilation 
inhomogeneity (Phase III slope of single-breath nitrogen washout test, SBN2), 
dyspnoea visual analogue scale, and pulmonary specific total airway resistances. 
Assessments were performed at baseline and 5, 15, 30, 60, and 180 min 
post-administration. Thirty-seven patients were randomized (31 male; mean age 71 
years). Aclidinium and glycopyrronium significantly improved ITGV versus 
baseline at all-time points (p < 0.05). Significant improvements in RV were 
observed after 5 min with aclidinium and after 60 min with glycopyrronium. RV 
improvements were significantly greater with aclidinium than glycopyrronium from 
5 to 60 min post-administration (p < 0.05). Both treatments improved dyspnoea 
versus baseline at all-time points (p < 0.05). Aclidinium significantly improved 
ventilation inhomogeneity versus baseline at all-time points; no significant 
changes were observed for glycopyrronium. For the first time two long-acting 
muscarinic antagonists have been compared in acute conditions with body 
plethysmography and SBN2 test. We demonstrated that both aclidinium and 
glycopyrronium significantly reduce hyperinflation and dyspnoea in severe and 
very severe COPD patients. Aclidinium however promoted a faster reduction in RV 
and was the only able to reduce lung ventilation inhomogeneity. Trial 
Registration numbers available on Clinicaltrials.gov: NCT02181023.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.11.001
PMID: 26549785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2017 Feb;42:13-20. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.12.001. Epub 
2016 Dec 9.

Fast onset of action of glycopyrronium compared with tiotropium in patients with 
moderate to severe COPD - A randomised, multicentre, crossover trial.

Watz H(1), Mailänder C(2), May C(3), Baier M(4), Kirsten AM(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf GmbH, Airway 
Research Center North (ARCN), German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Grosshansdorf, Germany. Electronic address: h.watz@pulmoresearch.de.
(2)Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nürnberg, Germany. Electronic address: 
claudia.mailaender@novartis.com.
(3)Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nürnberg, Germany. Electronic address: 
christoph.may@novartis.com.
(4)Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nürnberg, Germany. Electronic address: 
monika.baier@novartis.com.
(5)Pulmonary Research Institute at Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf GmbH, Airway 
Research Center North (ARCN), German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Grosshansdorf, Germany. Electronic address: a.kirsten@pulmoresearch.de.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators, including anticholinergics 
glycopyrronium and tiotropium, are central to symptomatic management of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In patients with moderate to severe COPD, 
glycopyrronium has demonstrated comparable efficacy to open-label and 
single-blinded tiotropium, but with faster onset of bronchodilation. The FAST 
study assessed the efficacy of glycopyrronium compared with tiotropium in serial 
spirometry and body plethysmography assessments to further characterize the 
earlier onset of action associated with glycopyrronium.
METHODS: In this German multicentre, randomised, double-blinded, double-dummy, 
cross-over study, patients with moderate-to-severe COPD received single-dose of 
glycopyrronium 44 μg and tiotropium 18 μg via the Breezhaler® and Handihaler® 
devices, respectively. Primary objective was to demonstrate superiority of 
glycopyrronium over tiotropium in terms of improvement in forced expiratory 
volume in 1 s as assessed by the area under the curve from 0 to 2 h (FEV1 AUC 
0-2h). Secondary endpoints were functional residual capacity (FRC), residual 
volume (RV), inspiratory capacity (IC), and specific airway resistance (sRaw), 
all measured by body plethysmography.
RESULTS: Of the 152 patients randomised, 99.3% completed the study. After 
inhalation of the single dose, glycopyrronium demonstrated superiority over 
tiotropium in early bronchodilation as assessed by improvement in FEV1 AUC0-2h 
(least squares mean treatment difference = 37 mL; 95% CI: 16, 59 mL; p < 0.01) 
and FEV1 at 15 min post-dose (least square mean treatment difference = 36 mL; 
95% CI: 14, 58 mL; p < 0.01). Both treatments showed similar improvements in 
FRCpleth, RV, and IC. Glycopyrronium showed statistically significant 
improvement in sRaw compared with tiotropium over the first 90 min after dosing, 
with the difference of 0.184 kPa × s at 90 min post-dose (95% CI: 
0.315,0.054 kPa × s; p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Glycopyrronium was superior to tiotropium in terms of early 
bronchodilation. Although both glycopyrronium and tiotropium showed similar 
improvements in static lung volume parameters, glycopyrronium reduced specific 
airway resistance faster than tiotropium, which could in part explain the 
earlier FEV1 response seen with glycopyrronium.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.govNCT01922271.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.12.001
PMID: 27940287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2020 Feb;21(2):213-231. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2019.1701656.

The pharmacological management of asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
overlap syndrome (ACOS).

Albertson TE(1)(2)(3), Chenoweth JA(2)(3), Pearson SJ(1)(3), Murin S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of California, Davis, 
Sacramento, CA, USA.
(3)Veterans Administration Northern California Health Care System, Department of 
Medicine, Mather, CA, USA.

Introduction: Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome 
(ACOS) is a disease phenotype that shares T helper lymphocyte cell 
Th1/neutrophilic/non-Type-2 Inflammation pathways thought to be key in COPD and 
Th2/eosinophilic/Type-2 inflammatory pathways of asthma. The pharmacology of 
treating ACOS is challenging in severe circumstances.Areas covered: This review 
evaluates the stepwise treatment of ACOS using pharmacological treatments used 
in both COPD and asthma. The most common medications involve the same inhalers 
used to treat COPD and asthma patients. Advanced stepwise therapies for ACOS 
patients are based on patient characteristics and biomarkers. Very few clinical 
trials exist that focus specifically on ACOS patients.Expert opinion: After 
inhalers, advanced therapies including phosphodiesterase inhibitors, macrolides, 
N-acetylcysteine and statin therapy for those ACOS patients with a COPD 
appearance and exacerbations are available. In atopic ACOS patients with 
exacerbations, advanced asthma therapies (leukotriene receptor antagonists and 
synthesis blocking agents.) are used. ACOS patients with elevated blood 
eosinophil/IgE levels are considered for immunotherapy or therapeutic monoclonal 
antibodies blocking specific Th2/Type-2 interleukins or IgE. Symptom control, 
stabilization/improvement in pulmonary function and reduced exacerbations are 
the metrics of success. More pharmacological trials of ACOS patients are needed 
to better understand which patients benefit from specific 
treatments.Abbreviations: 5-LOi: 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor; ACOS: asthma - COPD 
overlap syndrome; B2AR: Beta2 adrenergic receptors; cAMP: cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate; cGMP: cyclic guanosine monophosphate; CI: confidence interval; 
COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CRS : chronic rhinosinusitis; 
cys-LT: cysteinyl leukotrienes; DPI: dry powder inhaler; EMA: European Medicines 
Agency; FDA: US Food and Drug Administration; FDC: fixed-dose combination; FeNO: 
exhaled nitric oxide; FEV1: forced expiratory volume in one second; FVC: forced 
vital capacity; GM-CSF: granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; ICS : 
inhaled corticosteroids; IL: interleukin; ILC2: Type 2 innate lymphoid cells; 
IP3: Inositol triphosphate; IRR: incidence rate ratio; KOLD: Korean Obstructive 
Lung Disease; LABA: long-acting B2 adrenergic receptor agonist; LAMA: 
long acting muscarinic receptor antagonist; LRA: leukotriene receptor 
antagonist; LT: leukotrienes; MDI: metered-dose inhalers; MN: M-subtype 
muscarinic receptors; MRA: muscarinic receptor antagonist; NAC: 
N-acetylcysteine; NEB: nebulization; OR: odds ratio; PDE: phosphodiesterase; 
PEFR: peak expiratory flow rate; PGD2: prostaglandin D2; PRN: as needed; RR: 
risk ratio; SABA: short-acting B2 adrenergic receptor agonist; SAMA: 
short-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist; SDMI: spring-driven mist inhaler; 
Th1: T helper cell 1 lymphocyte; Th2: T helper cell 2 lymphocytes; TNF-α: tumor 
necrosis factor alpha; US : United States.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2019.1701656
PMID: 31955671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


429. JAAPA. 2019 Oct;32(10):44-45. doi: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000580568.79593.55.

What is the role of triple inhaled therapy in COPD?

Petite SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Sarah E. Petite is an assistant professor of pharmacy practice at the 
University of Toledo (Ohio) College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences. The 
author has disclosed no potential conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise.

Triple inhaled therapy for maintenance of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) consists of an inhaled corticosteroid, long acting muscarinic antagonist, 
and long-acting beta2-agonist. Recent clinical studies evaluating triple therapy 
found a reduction in COPD exacerbations compared with other combination 
therapies. This article discusses the role of triple therapy in treating 
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000580568.79593.55
PMID: 31567741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Postgrad Med. 2020 Mar;132(2):126-131. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1706996. Epub 
2020 Jan 11.

Pharmacological treatment of stable COPD: need for a simplified approach.

Hillas G(1), Papaporfyriou A(2), Dimakou K(1), Papaioannou AI(2).

Author information:
(1)5th Pulmonary Department, "Sotiria" Chest Diseases Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(2)2nd Respiratory Medicine Department, University of Athens, Attikon Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the most common diseases 
worldwide. Although different guidelines regarding therapeutic algorithms exist, 
the most widely adopted approach is the one suggested by the Global Initiative 
in Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease in which patients are stratified according 
to their dyspnea severity and their exacerbation history during the previous 
year. This combined assessment of COPD, which takes into consideration all 
aforementioned characteristics of COPD patients as well as the number of blood 
eosinophils, results in a proposed therapeutic algorithm which is complex and 
hard to memorize. This complexity is probable one of the causes that most health 
care professionals are not adherent to the guidelines when treating COPD 
patients. Here, we propose a simplified therapeutic algorithm for the treatment 
of COPD patients taking into consideration the current evidence on the use of 
bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1706996
PMID: 31852408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


431. COPD. 2015 Aug;12(4):366-73. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2014.948999.

Significance of Medication History at the Time of Entry into the COPDGene Study: 
Relationship with Exacerbation and CT Metrics.

Park SJ(1), Make B, Hersh CP, Bowler RP.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health , Denver , CO , USA.

BACKGROUND: Despite the importance of respiratory medication use in COPD, 
relatively little is known about which clinical phenotypes were associated with 
respiratory medications.
METHODS: To determine the association between respiratory medication use and 
exacerbations or quantitative CT metrics, we analyzed medication history from 
4,484 COPD subjects enrolled in the COPDGene Study.
RESULTS: 2,941 (65.6%) subjects were receiving one or more respiratory 
medications; this group experienced more frequent exacerbations in the year 
before study entry and had increased gas trapping, emphysema, and subsegmental 
airway wall area, compared to the patients who were on no respiratory 
medication. In subgroup analysis, subjects who were on triple therapy 
(long-acting beta2-agonist [LABA], long acting muscarinic antagonist [LAMA], and 
inhaled corticosteroids [ICS]) had the highest frequencies of exacerbations and 
severe exacerbations and tended to have increased quantitative measures of 
emphysema and gas trapping on CT compared to other five groups. After adjustment 
for confounding variables, the triple therapy group experienced more 
exacerbations and severe exacerbations compared with other five groups. In 
addition, the LABA+LAMA+ICS group was more likely to have emphysema and gas 
trapping on CT than other groups in multivariable logistic analysis. 
Interestingly, the total number of respiratory medications was significantly 
associated with not only the frequency of exacerbations but also gas trapping 
and airway wall thickness as assessed by CT scan in multivariable analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the use of respiratory medications, 
especially the number of medications, may identify a more severe phenotype of 
COPD that is highly susceptible to COPD exacerbations.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2014.948999
PMCID: PMC4620928
PMID: 25254928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Feb 4;11:193-205. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S95055. eCollection 2016.

The lung function profile of once-daily tiotropium and olodaterol via 
Respimat(®) is superior to that of twice-daily salmeterol and fluticasone 
propionate via Accuhaler(®) (ENERGITO(®) study).

Beeh KM(1), Derom E(2), Echave-Sustaeta J(3), Grönke L(4), Hamilton A(5), Zhai 
D(6), Bjermer L(7).

Author information:
(1)Insaf GmbH Institut für Atemwegsforschung, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitario Quirón, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim, Burlington, ON, Canada.
(6)InVentiv Health Clinical, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.

Comment in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Nov 23;11:2909-2911.

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium + olodaterol has demonstrated improvements beyond lung 
function benefits in a large Phase III clinical program as a once-daily 
maintenance treatment for COPD and may be a potential option for the initiation 
of maintenance treatment in COPD. Despite guideline recommendations that 
combined long-acting beta-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids should only be used 
in individuals at high risk of exacerbation, there is substantial use in 
individuals at lower risk. This raises the question of the comparative 
effectiveness of this combination as maintenance treatment in this group 
compared to other combination regimens.
OBJECTIVE: The study aimed to assess the effect on lung function of once-daily 
tiotropium + olodaterol versus twice-daily salmeterol + fluticasone propionate 
in all participants with Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
2 or 3 (moderate to severe) COPD.
METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, four-treatment, 
complete crossover study in which participants received once-daily tiotropium + 
olodaterol (5/5 µg and 2.5/5 µg) via Respimat(®) and twice-daily salmeterol + 
fluticasone propionate (50/500 µg and 50/250 µg) via Accuhaler(®) for 6 weeks. 
The primary end point was change in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 
area under the curve from 0 hour to 12 hours (AUC0-12) relative to the baseline 
after 6 weeks.
RESULTS: Tiotropium + olodaterol 5/5 µg and 2.5/5 µg demonstrated statistically 
significant improvements in FEV1 AUC0-12 compared to salmeterol + fluticasone 
propionate (improvements from baseline were 317 mL and 295 mL with tiotropium + 
olodaterol 5/5 µg and 2.5/5 µg, and 188 mL and 192 mL with salmeterol + 
fluticasone propionate 50/500 µg and 50/250 µg, respectively). Tiotropium + 
olodaterol was superior to salmeterol + fluticasone propionate in lung function 
secondary end points, including FEV1 area under the curve from 0 hour to 24 
hours (AUC0-24).
CONCLUSION: Once-daily tiotropium + olodaterol in participants with 
moderate-to-severe COPD provided superior lung function improvements to 
twice-daily salmeterol + fluticasone propionate. Dual bronchodilation can be 
considered to optimize lung function in individuals requiring maintenance 
treatment for COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S95055
PMCID: PMC4745834
PMID: 26893551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Aug 6;14:1753-1762. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S201314. eCollection 2019.

Bronchodilators for hyperinflation in COPD associated with biomass smoke: 
clinical trial.

Ramírez-Venegas A(1), Velázquez-Uncal M(1), Aranda-Chávez A(1), Guzmán-Bouilloud 
NE(1), Mayar-Maya ME(2), Pérez Lara-Albisua JL(1), Hernández-Zenteno RJ(3), 
Flores-Trujillo F(3), Sansores RH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tobacco Smoking and COPD Research, Instituto Nacional de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael Cosió Villegas", Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Department of Medical Attention, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades 
Respiratorias "Ismael Cosió Villegas", Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Obstructive Disease Ward, Pulmonary Obstructive Diseases Clinical Service, 
Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael Cosío Villegas", Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Medica Sur Clinic & Foundation , Mexico 
City, Mexico.

INTRODUCTION: The efficacy of long-acting bronchodilators for COPD associated 
with biomass (BE-COPD) has not been properly evaluated.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the acute effect of indacaterol (IND) 150 μg q.d and 
tiotropium (TIO) 18 μg q.d. on lung hyperinflation, walking distance (WD) and 
dyspnea during the six-minute walking test (6MWT) in moderate BE-COPD at 30, 60 
and 240 mins post-drug administration.
DESIGN: Randomized, controlled, open-level, crossover noninferiority clinical 
trial. Forty-two women with BE-COPD were randomly assigned to a bronchodilator 
sequence: IND-TIO or vice versa.
RESULTS: There were statistically significant changes over time in inspiratory 
capacity (IC) (p<0.0001), FEV1 (p<0.0001) and FVC (p<0.0001) when IND was used. 
When TIO was administered, an increase over all time periods was observed only 
for FEV1 (p<0.0001) and FVC (p<0.0001), whereas for IC an increase was observed 
only at 30 mins and 24 hrs after TIO administration. We did not find clinically 
significant increases in WD and dyspnea after the administration of both 
bronchodilators.
CONCLUSION: Both IND and TIO showed significant and fast onset improvement in 
hyperinflation. Therefore, either of them may be recommended as a first line of 
treatment for COPD associated with BE-COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S201314
PMCID: PMC6689558
PMID: 31496674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


434. Respiration. 2018;95 Suppl 1:6-10. doi: 10.1159/000487173. Epub 2018 Apr 27.

When Two Drugs Are Better than Three: Re-Modulating the Therapeutic Plan of a 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Patient.

Ielpo A, Crisafulli E.

We present the case of a 77-year-old man diagnosed with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) stage D with emphysema phenotype and treated with 
triple therapy (salmeterol, fluticasone propionate, and tiotropium) for 1 year 
without relevant improvements in exertional dyspnea and disease impact. After 
switching to combination therapy with a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) and a 
long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) (indacaterol/glycopyrronium), we 
observed, in a 3-month period, a substantial reduction of the modified Medical 
Research Council (mMRC) dyspnea scale and COPD Assessment Test (CAT) scores. 
Moreover, the patient reported a reduction of dynamic hyperinflation and an 
improvement of ventilatory response to exercise.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000487173
PMID: 29705779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Palliat Care. 2019 Apr;34(2):85-91. doi: 10.1177/0825859718819437. Epub 2018 
Dec 26.

Promoting Primary Palliative Care in Severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease: Symptom Management and Preparedness Planning.

Ansari AA(1), Pomerantz DH(2)(3), Jayes RL(4), Aguirre EA(5), Havyer RD(6).

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Hospital Medicine, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, 
IL, USA.
(2)2 Division of General Internal Medicine and Department of Family Medicine 
(Palliative Care), Albert Einstein College of Medicine Bronx, New York, NY, USA.
(3)3 Department of Medicine, Montefiore New Rochelle Hospital, New Rochelle, NY, 
USA.
(4)4 Division of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine, George Washington 
University Medical Faculty Associates, Washington, DC, USA.
(5)5 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)6 Division of Community Internal Medicine and Center for Palliative Medicine, 
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) poses challenges not only in 
symptom management but also in prognostication. Managing COPD requires 
clinicians to be proficient in the primary palliative care skills of symptom 
management and communication focused on eliciting goals and preferences. Dyspnea 
should initially be managed with the combination of long acting muscarinic 
antagonists and long-acting β-agonist inhalers, adding inhaled corticosteroids 
if symptoms persist. Opioids for the relief of dyspnea are safe when used at 
appropriate doses. Oxygen is only effective for relieving dyspnea in patients 
with severe hypoxemia. The relapsing-remitting nature of COPD makes 
prognostication challenging; however, there are tools to guide clinicians and 
patients in making plans both with respect to prognosis and symptom burden. 
Preparedness planning techniques promote detailed culturally appropriate 
conversations which allow patients and clinicians to consider disease-specific 
complications and develop goal-concordant treatment plans.

DOI: 10.1177/0825859718819437
PMID: 30587083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Bras Pneumol. 2019 Dec 13;45(6):e20180355. doi: 10.1590/1806-3713/e20180355. 
eCollection 2019.

Exploratory analysis of requests for authorization to dispense high-cost 
medication to COPD patients: the São Paulo "protocol".

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Carvalho-Pinto RM(1), Silva ITD(1)(2), Navacchia LYK(1), Granja FM(1)(2), 
Marques GG(1)(2), Nery TCDS(1), Fernandes FLA(1), Cukier A(1), Stelmach R(1).

Author information:
(1). Divisão de Pneumologia, Instituto do Coração - InCor - Hospital das 
Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP) 
Brasil.
(2). Disciplina de Saúde Coletiva, Faculdade de Medicina, Centro Universitário 
São Camilo, São Paulo (SP) Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: A resolution passed by the government of the Brazilian state of São 
Paulo established a protocol for requesting free COPD medications, including 
tiotropium bromide, creating regional authorization centers to evaluate and 
approve such requests, given the high cost of those medications. Our objective 
was to analyze the requests received by an authorization center that serves 
cities in the greater metropolitan area of (the city of) São Paulo between 2011 
and 2016.
METHODS: Data regarding the authorization, return, or rejection of the requests 
were compiled and analyzed in order to explain those outcomes. Subsequently, the 
clinical and functional data related to the patients were evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 7,762 requests for dispensing COPD medication were analyzed. 
Requests related to male patients predominated. Among the corresponding 
patients, the mean age was 66 years, 12% were smokers, 88% had frequent 
exacerbations, and 84% had severe/very severe dyspnea. The mean FEV1 was 37.2% 
of the predicted value. The total number of requests decreased by 24.5% from 
2012 to 2013 and was lowest in 2015. Most (65%) of the requests were accepted. 
The main reasons for the rejection/return of a request were a 
post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC ratio > 0.7, a post-bronchodilator FEV1 > 50% of 
the predicted value, and failure to provide information regarding previous use 
of a long-acting beta agonist. During the study period, the total number of 
requests returned/rejected decreased slightly, and there was improvement in the 
quality of the data included on the forms.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we have identified the characteristics of the requests for 
COPD medications and of the corresponding patients per region served by the 
authorization center analyzed, thus contributing to the improvement of local 
public health care measures.

DOI: 10.1590/1806-3713/e20180355
PMID: 31851214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2017 Sep 1;313(3):L507-L515. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00069.2017. Epub 2017 Jun 8.

The PDE4 inhibitor CHF-6001 and LAMAs inhibit bronchoconstriction-induced 
remodeling in lung slices.

Kistemaker LEM(1)(2)(3), Oenema TA(4)(2), Baarsma HA(4)(2), Bos IST(4)(2), 
Schmidt M(4)(2), Facchinetti F(5), Civelli M(5), Villetti G(5), Gosens R(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Groningen, The 
Netherlands; l.e.m.kistemaker@rug.nl.
(2)Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Research and Development, Aquilo, Groningen, The Netherlands; and.
(4)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Corporate Pre-clinical Research and Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Parma, 
Italy.

Combination therapy of PDE4 inhibitors and anticholinergics induces 
bronchoprotection in COPD. Mechanical forces that arise during 
bronchoconstriction may contribute to airway remodeling. Therefore, we 
investigated the impact of PDE4 inhibitors and anticholinergics on 
bronchoconstriction-induced remodeling. Because of the different mechanism of 
action of PDE4 inhibitors and anticholinergics, we hypothesized functional 
interactions of these two drug classes. Guinea pig precision-cut lung slices 
were preincubated with the PDE4 inhibitors CHF-6001 or roflumilast and/or the 
anticholinergics tiotropium or glycopyorrolate, followed by stimulation with 
methacholine (10 μM) or TGF-β1 (2 ng/ml) for 48 h. The inhibitory effects on 
airway smooth muscle remodeling, airway contraction, and TGF-β release were 
investigated. Methacholine-induced protein expression of smooth muscle-myosin 
was fully inhibited by CHF-6001 (0.3-100 nM), whereas roflumilast (1 µM) had 
smaller effects. Tiotropium and glycopyrrolate fully inhibited 
methacholine-induced airway remodeling (0.1-30 nM). The combination of CHF-6001 
and tiotropium or glycopyrrolate, in concentrations partially effective by 
themselves, fully inhibited methacholine-induced remodeling in combination. 
CHF-6001 did not affect airway closure and had limited effects on TGF-β1-induced 
remodeling, but rather, it inhibited methacholine-induced TGF-β release. The 
PDE4 inhibitor CHF-6001, and to a lesser extent roflumilast, and the LAMAs 
tiotropium and glycopyrrolate inhibit bronchoconstriction-induced remodeling. 
The combination of CHF-6001 and anticholinergics was more effective than the 
individual compounds. This cooperativity might be explained by the distinct 
mechanisms of action inhibiting TGF-β release and bronchoconstriction.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00069.2017
PMID: 28596292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Adv Ther. 2017 Jul;34(7):1622-1635. doi: 10.1007/s12325-017-0554-3. Epub 2017 
May 23.

Study Design of VESUTO(®): Efficacy of Tiotropium/Olodaterol on Lung 
Hyperinflation, Exercise Capacity, and Physical Activity in Japanese Patients 
with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Ichinose M(1), Minakata Y(2), Motegi T(3), Ueki J(4), Seki T(5), Anzai T(6), 
Takizawa A(5), Grönke L(7), Hirata K(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8574, Japan. 
ichinose@rm.med.tohoku.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Wakayama 
Hospital, 1138 Wada, Mihama-cho, Hidaka-gun, Wakayama, 644-0044, Japan.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Infectious Disease, and Oncology, Department 
of Internal Medicine, Nippon Medical School, 4-7-15 Kudan-minami, Chiyoda-ku, 
Tokyo, 102-0074, Japan.
(4)Clinical Research Unit of Respiratory Pathophysiology, Juntendo University 
Graduate School of Health Care and Nursing, 2-5-1, Takasu, Urayasu City, Chiba, 
279-0023, Japan.
(5)Medical Division, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co., Ltd, 2-1-1 Osaki, 
Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo, 141-6017, Japan.
(6)Clinical Information Division Data Science Center, Statistics Analysis 
Department, 1 EPS Corporation, 6-29 Shinogawamachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 
162-0814, Japan.
(7)Medicine TA Respiratory Diseases, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, 
Binger Straße 173, 55216 , Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City 
University, 1-4-3 Asahimachi, Abeno-ku, Osaka, 545-8585, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The superiority of tiotropium/olodaterol is demonstrated in 
improvement of lung function, dyspnea, lung hyperinflation, and quality of life 
compared with either monotherapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). Japanese Respiratory Society Guidelines for COPD management 
include improvement of exercise tolerance and daily physical activity as the 
treatment goals; however, there is limited evidence in Japanese patients with 
COPD.
METHODS: A protocol is developed for the VESUTO® study that investigates the 
efficacy of tiotropium/olodaterol fixed-dose combination (FDC) compared with 
tiotropium alone on inspiratory capacity (IC, volume from functional residual 
capacity to total lung capacity), exercise capacity, and daily physical activity 
in Japanese patients with COPD.
RESULTS: A total of 180 Japanese patients with COPD, aged ≥40 years will be 
enrolled into the double-blind, multicenter, active-controlled, crossover study 
(NCT02629965) and will be randomized to receive either tiotropium/olodaterol FDC 
or tiotropium for 6 weeks each [two puffs via RESPIMAT® (Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Ingelheim, Germany) inhaler in the morning]. The primary endpoint is IC at rest 
measured at 60 min post-dose after 6 weeks treatment. The secondary endpoints 
include the 6-min walk distance (6MWD) at 90 min post-dose and physical activity 
measured by the activity monitor in the last 2 weeks of the 6-week treatment 
periods. Lung function tests will also be assessed after 6 weeks treatment. A 
mixed-effects model repeated measures approach will be used for the primary and 
secondary endpoints.
CONCLUSION: The VESUTO® study is the first randomized interventional study to 
investigate exercise capacity (6MWD) and physical activity measured by a 3-axis 
accelerometer in Japanese patients with COPD. The study could provide additional 
evidence of long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) + long-acting beta-agonist 
(LABA) combination therapy on patients' physical activities as well as lung 
function.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02629965 (registered on December 1, 
2015).
FUNDING: The VESUTO study was funded by Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co., Ltd., 
Tokyo, Japan.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-017-0554-3
PMCID: PMC5504218
PMID: 28537001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Adv Ther. 2015 Sep;32(9):809-22. doi: 10.1007/s12325-015-0239-8. Epub 2015 Sep 
24.

Randomized, Double-Blind, Dose-Finding Study for Tiotropium when Added to 
Olodaterol, Administered via the Respimat® Inhaler in Patients with Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Aalbers R(1), Maleki-Yazdi MR(2), Hamilton A(3), Waitere-Wijker S(4), Zhao Y(5), 
Amatto VC(6), Schmidt O(7), Bjermer L(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Disease, Martini Hospital, Groningen, The 
Netherlands. R.Aalbers@MZH.NL.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Women's College Hospital, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim, Burlington, ON, Canada.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim BV, Alkmaar, The Netherlands.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc., Ridgefield, CT, USA.
(6)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH and Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(7)Lungen- und Bronchialheilkunde, Koblenz, Germany.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Skåne University 
Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Combining long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) and 
long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) is beneficial in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), as the two classes of bronchodilator have complementary modes of 
action. The optimal dose for the fixed-dose combination of the LAMA tiotropium 
and the LABA olodaterol needed to be determined. In this phase II trial, the 
dose response of tiotropium on top of olodaterol was investigated in a free-dose 
combination, while other phase II studies have explored different doses of 
olodaterol on top of tiotropium, with both drugs delivered using the Respimat(®) 
inhaler.
METHODS: This was a double-blind incomplete crossover trial in which 233 
patients with moderate or severe COPD were randomized to receive four out of 
eight free-dose combinations of olodaterol (5 or 10 µg) and tiotropium (1.25, 
2.5, or 5 µg) or placebo for 4 weeks each. Primary end point was trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) change from baseline (response) after 4 weeks.
RESULTS: Addition of tiotropium 1.25, 2.5, and 5 µg to olodaterol 5 µg increased 
mean trough FEV1 response by 0.054, 0.065, and 0.084 L, respectively; addition 
of tiotropium 1.25, 2.5, and 5 µg to olodaterol 10 µg increased mean trough FEV1 
response by 0.051, 0.083, and 0.080 L, respectively. All treatments were well 
tolerated and incidence of adverse events was similar with all treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, a dose response for tiotropium on top of both doses of 
olodaterol was observed, with increasing improvements in trough FEV1 compared to 
olodaterol alone as the tiotropium dose was increased.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01040403.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-015-0239-8
PMCID: PMC4604503
PMID: 26404912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 19;14:2175-2184. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S223002. eCollection 2019.

Imidafenacin, An Orally Active Muscarinic Receptor Antagonist, Improves 
Pulmonary Function In Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A 
Multicenter, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled 3×3 Crossover Phase II 
Trial.

Machida K(#)(1), Kawayama T(#)(2), Kinoshita M(#)(3), Ichinose M(4), Tsuda T(5), 
Takata S(6), Koto H(7), Yoshida M(8), Ashihara Y(9), Kawashima M(10), Suna 
H(10), Inoue H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan.
(2)Division of Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, 
Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume 830-0011, Japan.
(3)Nagata Hospital, Yanagawa 832-0059, Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.
(5)Kirigaoka Tsuda Hospital, Kitakyushu 802-0052 Japan.
(6)Division of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization 
Fukuoka-Higashi Medical Center, Koga 811-3195, Japan.
(7)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Kyushu Central Hospital of the Mutual Aid 
Association of Public School Teachers, Fukuoka 815-8588, Japan.
(8)Division of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Fukuoka 
Hospital, Fukuoka 811-1394, Japan.
(9)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Oita Nakamura Hospital, Oita 870-0022, 
Japan.
(10)ONO Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Osaka 541-8564, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Although long acting muscarinic receptor antagonists are central to 
the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), inhaled 
medicines may have technical difficulty in some patients and adherence barriers.
METHODS: A multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 3×3 
crossover Phase II trial was performed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of 
oral administration of the antimuscarinic agent imidafenacin in patients with 
COPD. Twenty-seven male COPD patients with % forced expiratory volume in 1 s 
(FEV1) ≥30% and <80% predicted were randomized to single oral dose of 
imidafenacin 0.1 mg, imidafenacin 0.2 mg, or placebo.
RESULTS: Maximum change in FEV1 with both doses of imidafenacin significantly 
improved from baseline to 24 hrs after administration when compared with a 
placebo. Area under the curve in FEV1 during 24 hrs after administration with 
0.2 mg, but not 0.1 mg dose, was significantly improved when compared with a 
placebo, and the improvement was significantly based on dose-dependent manners. 
Plasma imidafenacin level was positively correlated with change in FEV1. All 
subjects with both doses of imidafenacin completed without moderate nor severe 
adverse events.
CONCLUSION: A single oral dose of imidafenacin 0.1 mg or imidafenacin 0.2 mg may 
contribute to the improvement of pulmonary function with excellent safety and 
tolerability in patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: JapicCTI-121760 (Japan Pharmaceutical Information Center - 
Clinical Trials Information [JapicCTI]; 
http://www.clinicaltrials.jp/user/cteSearch_e.jsp).

© 2019 Machida et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S223002
PMCID: PMC6757323
PMID: 31571853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Kinoshita received honoraria from 
GlaxoSmithKline K.K., Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd., Novartis Pharma K.K., Takeda 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., and Astellas Pharma Inc. Dr. Tsuda received honoraria 
from Novartis Pharma K.K., Pfizer Japan Inc., and Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim 
Co. Ltd. Mr. Kawashima and Dr. Suna are full-time employees of Ono 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Japan. Dr. Inoue received research grants from Asahi 
Kasei Corporation, Astellas Pharma Inc., Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co. Ltd., 
Chugai Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Co. Ltd., Eisai Co. 
Ltd., MSD K.K., Nippon Kayaku Co. Ltd., Shionogi & Co. Ltd., Taisho Toyama 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., and Teijin Pharma Ltd.; gave lectures and acted on 
advisory committees for Asahi Kasei Corporation, Astellas Pharma Inc., 
AstraZeneca K.K., Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co. Ltd., Chugai Pharmaceutical 
Co. Ltd., Eisai Co. Ltd., GlaxoSmithKline K.K., Eli Lilly Japan K.K., Kyorin 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., MSD K.K., Meiji Seika Pharma Co. Ltd., Novartis Pharma 
K.K., Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Pfizer Japan Inc., Shionogi & Co. Ltd., 
Taisho Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., and Teijin Pharma Ltd. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this work.


441. Respir Med. 2018 Oct;143:67-73. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.08.012. Epub 2018 Aug 
28.

Safety of tiotropium/olodaterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: pooled 
analysis of three large, 52-week, randomized clinical trials.

Ferguson GT(1), Buhl R(2), Bothner U(3), Hoz A(4), Voß F(5), Anzueto A(6), 
Calverley PMA(7).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Suite A, 29255 W 10 Mile 
Road, Farmington Hills, MI, 48336, USA. Electronic address: 
garytferguson@msn.com.
(2)Johannes Gutenberg University Hospital Mainz, Langenbeckstraße 1, 55131, 
Mainz, Germany. Electronic address: Roland.Buhl@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(3)TA/Respiratory Biosimilars Medicine, Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, 
Binger Strasse 173, 55216, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany. Electronic address: 
ulrich.bothner@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(4)TA/Respiratory Biosimilars Medicine, Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, 
Binger Strasse 173, 55216, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany. Electronic address: 
alberto.de_la_hoz@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(5)Biostatistics & Data Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, 
Binger Strasse 173, 55216, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany. Electronic address: 
florian.voss@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(6)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Critical Care, University of Texas 
Health Sciences Center and South Texas Veterans Health Care System, 4242 Medical 
Drive, Suite 111E, San Antonio, TX, 78229, USA. Electronic address: 
anzueto@uthscsa.edu.
(7)Clinical Science Centre, Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University 
of Liverpool, 6 West Derby Street, Liverpool, L7 8TX, UK. Electronic address: 
pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: An extensive clinical trial program supports the efficacy and safety 
of tiotropium/olodaterol in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We 
examined the safety of tiotropium/olodaterol compared with tiotropium in a large 
population of patients, focusing on cardiovascular and respiratory events.
METHODS: Patients (n = 9942) who received once-daily tiotropium/olodaterol 
5/5 μg or tiotropium 5 μg (via Respimat®) in TONADO 1 & 2 and DYNAGITO were 
included. The number of patients and exposure-adjusted rate of events are 
presented for adverse events (AEs), serious AEs (SAEs), AEs leading to 
discontinuation, and cardiovascular and respiratory events.
FINDINGS: Fewer patients discontinued due to AEs with tiotropium/olodaterol 
(5.9%) versus tiotropium (7.9%; rate ratio [RR] 0.72; 95% confidence interval 
[CI] 0.62-0.84). There was no significant difference in the incidence of AEs, 
SAEs, cardiovascular AEs or central nervous system vascular AEs between 
treatments. Incidences of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) were 2.11 
per 100 patient-years with tiotropium/olodaterol and 2.22 with tiotropium (RR 
0.95; 95% CI 0.72-1.25), and incidences of fatal MACE (including death with 
undetermined cause) were 0.91 and 1.00 per 100 patient-years with 
tiotropium/olodaterol and tiotropium, respectively (RR 0.91; 95% CI 0.60-1.37). 
Respiratory AEs were generally balanced between treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide robust evidence that the benefits of 
tiotropium/olodaterol versus tiotropium are not at the expense of an increased 
risk of safety events. The combination is a suitable option for patients with 
COPD, even in the presence of cardiovascular risk factors.
CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials. gov (TONADO 1 and 2: NCT01431274, 
NCT01431287; DYNAGITO: NCT02296138).

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.08.012
PMID: 30261995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016 Feb 4;11:263-71. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S93830. 
eCollection 2016.

Functional respiratory imaging to assess the interaction between systemic 
roflumilast and inhaled ICS/LABA/LAMA.

Vos W(1), Hajian B(2), De Backer J(1), Van Holsbeke C(1), Vinchurkar S(1), Claes 
R(2), Hufkens A(2), Parizel PM(3), Bedert L(4), De Backer W(2).

Author information:
(1)FLUIDDA nv, Groeningenlei, Kontich, University Hospital Antwerp, 
Wilrijkstraat, Edegem, Belgium.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Antwerp, 
Wilrijkstraat, Edegem, Belgium.
(3)Department of Radiology, University Hospital Antwerp, Wilrijkstraat, Edegem, 
Belgium.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, ZNA Middelheim Hospital, Antwerp, 
Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Patients with COPD show a significant reduction of the lobar 
hyperinflation at the functional residual capacity level in the patients who 
improved >120 mL in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) after 6 months 
of treatment with roflumilast in addition to inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICSs)/long-acting beta-2 agonists (LABAs)/long acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMAs).
METHODS: Functional respiratory imaging was used to quantify lobar 
hyperinflation, blood vessel density, ventilation, aerosol deposition, and 
bronchodilation. To investigate the exact mode of action of roflumilast, 
correlations between lobar and global measures have been tested using a 
mixed-model approach with nested random factors and Pearson correlation, 
respectively.
RESULTS: The reduction in lobar hyperinflation appears to be associated with a 
larger blood vessel density in the respective lobes (t=-2.154, P=0.040); lobes 
with a higher percentage of blood vessels reduce more in hyperinflation in the 
responder group. Subsequently, it can be observed that lobes that reduce in 
hyperinflation after treatment are better ventilated (t=-5.368, P<0.001). 
Functional respiratory imaging (FRI)-based aerosol deposition showed that 
enhanced ventilation leads to more peripheral particle deposition of 
ICS/LABA/LAMA in the better-ventilated areas (t=2.407, P=0.024). Finally, the 
study showed that areas receiving more particles have increased FRI-based 
bronchodilation (t=2.564, P=0.017), leading to an increase in FEV1 (R=0.348, 
P=0.029).
CONCLUSION: The study demonstrated that orally administered roflumilast supports 
the reduction of regional hyperinflation in areas previously undertreated by 
inhalation medication. The local reduction in hyperinflation induces a 
redistribution of ventilation and aerosol deposition, leading to enhanced 
efficacy of the concomitant ICS/LABA/LAMA therapy. FRI appears to be a sensitive 
tool to describe the mode of action of novel compounds in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. Future studies need to confirm the enhanced sensitivity and 
the potential of FRI parameters to act as surrogates for clinically relevant, 
but more difficult to measure, end points such as exacerbations.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S93830
PMCID: PMC4745845
PMID: 26917956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Adv Ther. 2016 May;33(5):786-93. doi: 10.1007/s12325-016-0322-9. Epub 2016 Mar 
28.

Tiotropium Respimat(®) Versus HandiHaler(®): Comparison of Bronchodilator 
Efficacy of Various Doses in Clinical Trials.

Calverley PM(1), Könen-Bergmann M(2), Richard F(3), Bell S(4), Hohlfeld JM(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary and Rehabilitation Medicine, Institute of Ageing and Chronic 
Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. pmacal@liverpool.ac.uk.
(2)Clinical Development + Medical Affairs, Boehringer Ingelheim, Ingelheim, 
Germany.
(3)Medicine TA Respiratory Diseases, Boehringer Ingelheim, Ingelheim, Germany.
(4)Statistics, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bracknell, UK.
(5)Clinical Airway Research, Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and 
Experimental Medicine (ITEM), Hannover, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: The long acting muscarinic antagonist tiotropium bromide is 
approved in many countries as maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Tiotropium is available as a dry-powder formulation 
delivered via HandiHaler(®) (18 μg once daily) and is now also approved as an 
aqueous solution delivered via the Respimat(®) Soft Mist™ Inhaler (5 μg once 
daily, 2 puffs of 2.5 µg). Several studies have compared the efficacy of 
tiotropium HandiHaler (18 μg once daily) with different doses of Respimat. We 
aimed to compare available bronchodilator efficacy data of once-daily Respimat 
1.25, 2.5, 5, 10, 20 µg, and HandiHaler 18 µg to investigate which dose of 
tiotropium delivered by Respimat is the closest match to tiotropium HandiHaler.
METHODS: Evaluation of six clinical trials (duration from 3 weeks to 2-3 years) 
that included lung function measures (trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s and 
trough forced vital capacity) as key outcomes.
RESULTS: In the six trials, bronchodilator efficacy of Respimat 5 μg and 
HandiHaler 18 μg was similar; however, reduced bronchodilator efficacy was 
observed with lower doses of Respimat (1.25 and 2.5 μg).
CONCLUSION: These findings support the use of the marketed once-daily dose of 
Respimat 5 μg for the maintenance treatment of patients with COPD.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-016-0322-9
PMCID: PMC4882367
PMID: 27084728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Drug Res (Stuttg). 2019 Apr;69(4):211-217. doi: 10.1055/a-0665-4379. Epub 2018 
Sep 7.

A Single Institution Retrospective Study of the Clinical Efficacy of Tiotropium 
Respimat in Never-Smoking Elderly Asthmatics with Irreversible Airflow 
Limitation.

Hara J(1), Kasahara K(2), Ohkura N(1), Yamamura K(2), Sakai T(2), Abo M(1), 
Ogawa N(2), Saeki K(1), Koba H(3), Watanabe S(3), Uchida Y(1), Tambo Y(1), Sone 
T(4), Kimura H(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Kanazawa University Hospital, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 
Japan.
(2)Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Medical, 
Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 
Japan.
(3)Respiratory Medicine, Cellular Transplantation Biology, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(4)Regional Respiratory Symptomatology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of 
Medical Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: In Japan, most asthma deaths occur among the elderly. We should 
improve the control of asthma in elderly patients to reduce the number of deaths 
due to asthma. This retrospective study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of 
tiotropium RespimatⓇ (Tio-Res) in symptomatic, never-smoking, elderly asthmatics 
with irreversible airflow limitation despite the use of high-dose inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) plus long-acting beta-adrenoceptor agonists (LABA).
METHODS: The Asthma Control Test™ (ACT), pulmonary function tests, morning and 
evening peak flow (mPEF, ePEF, respectively, evaluated with an ASSESS® peak flow 
meter), and respiratory impedance (assessed with MostGraph®) were measured 
before and after a minimum of one year of Tio-Res 5 µg/day administration. 
Sixteen symptomatic, never-smoking asthmatics, aged 75 or over with irreversible 
airflow limitation despite the use of high-dose ICS plus LABA, were analyzed.
RESULTS: All patients were female (mean age, 81.6 years). Tio-Res led to 
statistically significant improvements in the total ACT score (19.9 to 23.6), 
FVC and FEV1 (1.97 to 2.14 L and 1.13 to 1.23 L, respectively), and mPEF and 
ePEF (229.9 to 253.8 L/min and 259.8 to 277.4 L/min, respectively). Tio-Res also 
resulted in statistically significant improvements in respiratory resistance at 
5 Hz (R5), respiratory resistance at 20 Hz (R20), R5-R20, low-frequency reactant 
indices at 5 Hz (X5), resonant frequency (Fres) and low-frequency reactance area 
(ALX).
CONCLUSIONS: Our retrospective study suggests that Tio-Res improves symptoms, 
pulmonary function, and respiratory impedance in symptomatic asthmatics aged 75 
or over with irreversible airflow limitation despite the use of high-dose ICS 
plus LABA.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0665-4379
PMID: 30193393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest. The 
authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of this paper.


445. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jul 21;(7):CD011437. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011437.pub2.

long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) added to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) 
versus higher dose ICS for adults with asthma.

Evans DJ(1), Kew KM, Anderson DE, Boyter AC.

Author information:
(1)Lancaster Patient Safety Research Unit, Royal Lancaster Infirmary, Pointer 
Court 1, Ashton Road, Lancaster, UK, LA1 4RP.

BACKGROUND: long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA), a class of drugs with 
proven effectiveness in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), are being 
considered as an add-on option for adults with asthma whose condition is 
uncontrolled on inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). It is important to assess the 
safety and efficacy of LAMA add-on as an alternative to the prolonged use of 
higher doses of ICS, which are known to cause undesirable side effects in some 
people.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the effects of adding a LAMA to any dose of ICS versus 
increasing the dose of ICS, for uncontrolled asthma in adults.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register 
(CAGR) from its inception in 1995 to April 2015, imposing no restriction on 
language of publication. We also handsearched trial registries, reference lists 
of primary studies and existing reviews, as well as manufacturers' websites.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We looked for parallel or cross-over randomised controlled 
trials lasting at least 12 weeks, in which adults whose asthma was not well 
controlled on ICS alone were randomised to treatment with LAMA add-on to ICS or 
with an increased dose of ICS. Trials were excluded if patients were taking 
long-acting beta2-agonists during the study period.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently screened the 
searches and extracted data from studies meeting all the inclusion criteria. We 
used Covidence to manage duplicate screening, data extraction and risk of bias 
judgements, and to form a consensus where discrepancies arose. We used standard 
methods expected by The Cochrane Collaboration.The pre-specified primary 
outcomes were exacerbations requiring a course of oral corticosteroids (OCS), 
effects on quality of life and serious adverse events.
MAIN RESULTS: One cross-over randomised controlled trial met the inclusion 
criteria. The trial was performed in 210 patients with moderate to severe asthma 
and compared the use of the LAMA tiotropium bromide with double dose 
beclomethasone (an ICS) using a cross-over design and 14-week treatment 
periods.Compared with people taking a double dose of ICS, fewer people taking a 
LAMA add-on had an exacerbation requiring treatment with OCS (odds ratio (OR) 
0.57, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.22 to 1.43) or an exacerbation resulting in 
emergency department admission (OR 0.49, 95% CI 0.09 to 2.77), but the 
confidence intervals for both outcomes did not exclude the possibility that 
double dose ICS was more effective. Serious adverse events and exacerbations 
requiring hospitalisation occurred in similarly low numbers of people taking 
each treatment, but confidence intervals were too wide to suggest that the two 
treatment options were equivalent.Asthma-related quality of life was similar in 
both treatment groups (mean difference (MD) in change from baseline 0.10, 95% CI 
- 0.07 to 0.27). Those taking LAMA add-on scored slightly better on a scale 
measuring asthma control than those increasing their ICS dose (MD in change from 
baseline - 0.18, 95% CI - 0.34 to - 0.02), although the difference was 
clinically small. Evidence was deemed low quality for both quality of life and 
asthma control.There was moderate-quality evidence that participants' trough 
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) was 100 mL better when taking LAMA 
add-on than with increased ICS dose (MD in change from baseline 0.10, 95% CI 
0.03 to 0.17).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Only one randomised trial was found, comparing tiotropium 
add-on to increased dose beclomethasone. Differences between the treatments were 
too small or imprecise to understand whether adding a LAMA to ICS is safer or 
more effective than increasing the dose of ICS, and there is a possibility of 
carry-over effects due to the study's cross-over design. LAMA add-on may lead to 
more improvement in lung function (FEV1) than an increased dose of ICS.The 
results of this review, alongside pending results from related reviews assessing 
the use of LAMA against other treatments, will help to define the role of these 
drugs in asthma management, and this review should be updated as results from 
future trials emerge. Studies assessing the role of LAMA add-on should be longer 
and include a double-ICS treatment arm so that the results can be interpreted in 
the context of the guideline-recommended treatment options that are available to 
physicians.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011437.pub2
PMID: 26196545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2016 Apr;43(2):153-64. doi: 
10.1007/s10928-015-9461-x. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Concentration-QT analysis of the randomized, placebo- and 
moxifloxacin-controlled thorough QT study of umeclidinium monotherapy and 
umeclidinium/vilanterol combination in healthy subjects.

Mehta R(1), Green M(2), Patel B(3), Wagg J(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Modeling Simulation, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research 
Triangle Park, NC, 27709, USA. rashmi.s.mehta@gsk.com.
(2)Quantitative Solutions, Menlo Park, CA, USA.
(3)Clinical Pharmacology Modeling Simulation, GSK, King of Prussia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Translational Medicine, Shire, Eysins, Switzerland.
(5)Clinical Pharmacology, Head Oncology Modeling, Roche, Basel, Switzerland.

The long acting muscarinic antagonist umeclidinium (UMEC) is approved as a 
once-daily monotherapy and in combination with the long-acting beta agonist 
vilanterol (VI) for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The objective of this 
analysis was to assess the relationship between observed plasma UMEC and/or VI 
concentrations and QT interval corrected using Fridericia's correction (QTcF). 
103 subjects were enrolled and 86 (83 %) completed the study. Subjects were 
randomized to 4 of 5 repeat-dose treatments (days 1-10: n = 77 subjects received 
placebo, n = 76 UMEC 500 µg, n = 78 UMEC/VI 125/25 µg, or n = 76 UMEC/VI 500/100 
µg; day 10: n = 74 oral tablet moxifloxacin 400 mg [positive control]). The 
concentration-QTcF interval relationship was examined using nonlinear 
mixed-effects methods. For UMEC, predicted QTcF interval prolongation (at 
observed geometric mean of maximum plasma concentrations) was -2.38 ms (90 % 
prediction interval [PI] -3.82, -0.85) with UMEC 500 µg and -0.50 ms (90 % PI 
-0.80, -0.18) and -2.01 ms (90 % PI -3.22, -0.72) with UMEC/VI 125/25 µg and 
500/100 µg, respectively. For VI, estimates were 5.89 ms (90 % PI 4.89, 6.91) 
and 7.23 ms (90 % PI 5.88, 8.55) with UMEC/VI 125/25 µg and 500/100 µg, 
respectively. Combined additive mean effects were estimated for UMEC/VI 125/25 
µg (5.39 ms [90 % PI 4.40, 6.47]) and 500/100 µg (5.22 ms [90 % PI 3.72, 6.80]). 
The model-predicted decrease with UMEC and increase with UMEC/VI combination in 
QTcF interval suggest that the QT effect is likely attributable to VI. These 
model-predicted results support those of previously-published traditional 
statistical analyses.

DOI: 10.1007/s10928-015-9461-x
PMID: 26739997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2019 Jan 1;126(1):67-76. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.00565.2018. Epub 2018 Oct 25.

Physiologic and histopathologic effects of targeted lung denervation in an 
animal model.

Hummel JP(1), Mayse ML(2), Dimmer S(2), Johnson PJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Wisconsin , Madison, Wisconsin.
(2)Nuvaira, Inc. , Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Parasympathetic efferent innervation of the lung is the primary source of lung 
acetylcholine. Inhaled long acting beta agonistss improve lung function and 
symptoms in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Targeted lung 
denervation (TLD), a bronchoscopic procedure intended to disrupt pulmonary 
parasympathetic inputs, is an experimental treatment for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. The physiologic and histologic effects of TLD have not 
previously been assessed. Eleven sheep and two dogs underwent circumferential 
ablation of the main bronchi with simultaneous balloon surface cooling using a 
lung denervation system (Nuvaira, Inc., Minneapolis, MN). Changes in pulmonary 
air flow resistance were monitored before and following TLD. Four animals were 
assessed for the presence or abolishment of the sensory axon-mediated 
Hering-Breuer reflex before and following TLD. Six sheep were histologically 
evaluated 30 days post-TLD for the extent of lung denervation (axonal staining) 
and effect on peribronchial structures near the treatment site. No adverse 
clinical effects were seen in any treated animals. TLD produced a ~30% reduction 
in pulmonary resistance and abolished the sensory-mediated Hering-Breuer reflex. 
Axonal staining was consistently decreased 60% at 30 days after TLD. All treated 
airways exhibited 100% epithelial integrity. Damage to other peribronchial 
structures was minimal. Tissue 1 cm proximal and distal to the treatment was 
normal, and the esophagus and periesophageal vagus nerve branches were 
unaffected. TLD treatment effectively denervates the lung while protecting the 
bronchial epithelium and minimizing effects on peribronchial structures. NEW & 
NOTEWORTHY The feasibility of targeted lung denervation, a new minimally 
invasive therapy for obstructive lung disease, has been demonstrated in humans 
with preliminary clinical studies demonstrating improvement in symptoms, 
pulmonary function, and exercise capacity in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. This preclinical animal study demonstrates the ability of 
targeted lung denervation to disrupt vagal inputs to the lung and details its 
physiologic and histopathologic effects.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00565.2018
PMCID: PMC6383645
PMID: 30359539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Respir Med. 2015 Sep;109(9):1155-63. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.06.006. Epub 2015 
Jun 14.

Efficacy and safety of umeclidinium added to fluticasone furoate/vilanterol in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Results of two randomized studies.

Siler TM(1), Kerwin E(2), Sousa AR(3), Donald A(4), Ali R(3), Church A(4).

Author information:
(1)Midwest Chest Consultants, PC, 330 First Capitol Drive, Suite 470, St 
Charles, MO, USA. Electronic address: thomas.siler.md@midwestchest.com.
(2)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, OR, USA.
(3)GSK, Respiratory Medicines Development Centre, Stockley Park, Middlesex, UK.
(4)GSK, Respiratory and Immuno-Inflammation, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

Erratum in
    Respir Med. 2015 Nov;109(11):1493.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of these studies (NCT01957163; NCT02119286) was to evaluate 
the efficacy and safety of umeclidinium (UMEC 62.5 μg and 125 μg) added to 
fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI, 100/25 μg) in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: These were 12-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, 
multicenter studies. Eligible patients were randomized 1:1:1 to treatment with 
once-daily blinded UMEC 62.5 μg (delivering 55 μg), UMEC 125 μg (delivering 113 
μg) or placebo (PBO) added to open-label FF/VI (delivering 92/22 μg; N = 1238 
[intent-to-treat population]). The primary endpoint was trough forced expiratory 
volume in one second (FEV1) on Day 85; the secondary endpoint was 0-6 h 
post-dose weighted mean (WM) FEV1 at Day 84. Health-related quality of life was 
reported using St George's respiratory questionnaire (SGRQ). Adverse events 
(AEs) were also assessed.
RESULTS: In both studies, trough FEV1 was significantly improved with UMEC + 
FF/VI (62.5 μg and 125 μg) versus PBO + FF/VI (range: 0.111-0.128 L, all p < 
0.001 [Day 85]), as was 0-6 h post-dose WM FEV1 (range: 0.135-0.153 L, all p < 
0.001 [Day 84]). SGRQ results were inconsistent, with statistically significant 
improvements with UMEC + FF/VI versus PBO + FF/VI in one study only and with 
UMEC 62.5 μg only (difference in SGRQ total score from baseline between 
treatments: -2.16, p < 0.05). Across all treatment groups, the overall 
incidences of AEs were similar (30-39%), as were cardiovascular AEs of special 
interest (<1-3%) and pneumonia AEs (0-1%).
CONCLUSION: Overall, the addition of UMEC to FF/VI therapy resulted in 
significant improvements in lung function compared with PBO + FF/VI in patients 
with COPD, with similar safety profiles, though SGRQ results were inconsistent.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The results from these two studies demonstrate that the 
addition of umeclidinium (62.5 μg and 125 μg) to FF/VI (100/25 μg) provides 
statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvements in lung 
function compared with placebo + FF/VI in patients with COPD. Statistically 
significant improvements in quality of life with UMEC + FF/VI versus placebo + 
FF/VI were reported in one study only. Safety profiles were consistent across 
all treatment groups in both studies. These studies support the use of triple 
therapy in COPD, providing physicians with an alternative treatment option.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.06.006
PMID: 26117292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Comp Eff Res. 2017 Oct;6(7):627-636. doi: 10.2217/cer-2017-0037. Epub 2017 Aug 
25.

Comparative effectiveness of indacaterol/glycopyrronium in the treatment of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cazzola M(1), Rogliani P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Indacaterol/glycopyrronium has been the first long-acting beta-agonist 
(LABA)/long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) fixed-dose combination to be 
approved as a maintenance treatment in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
patients. Comparative effectiveness studies indicate that it is constantly 
superior to a LAMA or a LABA alone or even a LABA/inhaled corticosteroid 
combination, regardless of the drugs used. However, definitive data documenting 
the benefit of indacaterol/glycopyrronium fixed-dose combination over these 
consolidated therapies are still absent in a real-world setting, although the 
results of pivotal randomized controlled trials show that this is the case. 
Therefore, in addition to the large body of evidence already available 
supporting the use of indacaterol/glycopyrronium, pragmatic observational 
studies or ad hoc designed trials should be planned to collect data that could 
confirm the high effectiveness of indacaterol/glycopyrronium even in the 
real-life clinical practice.

DOI: 10.2217/cer-2017-0037
PMID: 28840753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;839:1-5. doi: 10.1007/5584_2014_51.

Inhaled corticosteroids increase siglec-5/14 expression in sputum cells of COPD 
patients.

Wielgat P(1), Mroz RM, Stasiak-Barmuta A, Szepiel P, Chyczewska E, Braszko JJ, 
Holownia A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Bialystok, 15A 
Waszyngtona St., Bialystok, Poland, pwielgat@gmail.com.

Recent studies show that several Siglec receptors, such as Siglec-8 and 
Siglec-14, may be important therapeutic targets in asthma and COPD. Siglecs are 
a family of lectins belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily and recognize 
sialic acid residues of glycoproteins. Most of Siglecs have intracellular 
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIM), implicating them in the 
suppression of immunoreceptor signaling. Siglec-5/14 may be involved in the 
negative regulation of innate immune responses. The aim of this study was to 
analyze Siglec-5/14 expression in induced sputum cells of COPD patients in the 
following treatment combinations: (1) a long-acting beta2-agonist, formoterol; 
(2) formoterol combined with a long-acting antimuscarinic agent, tiotropium; and 
(3) formoterol combined with an inhaled corticosteroid or formoterol combined 
with tiotropium and with an inhaled corticosteroid. Siglec expression was 
assessed in sputum cells by flow cytometry using a specific monoclonal antibody. 
Double staining of cells indicated that Siglec-5/14 is expressed in 
monocyte/macrophages and neutrophils, but not in lymphocytes. Siglec-5/14 
expression was significantly higher in patients receiving combined therapy 
including inhaled corticosteroids compared with patients taking only formoterol 
or formoterol + tiotropium. Our results suggest that inhaled corticosteroids may 
exert beneficial or negative effects, depending on the patients' phenotype, 
through increased immunosuppressive Siglec-5 or immunoactivatory Siglec-14 
receptors, respectively.

DOI: 10.1007/5584_2014_51
PMID: 25252903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2015 Apr;28(2):100-5. doi: 
10.1089/jamp.2014.1125. Epub 2014 May 19.

Effect of tiotropium on heart rate variability in stable chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease patients.

Wu YK(1), Huang CY, Yang MC, Huang GL, Chen SY, Lan CC.

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei Tzu 
Chi Hospital , Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, New Taipei City, Taiwan .

BACKGROUND: The chronic use of the long acting beta agonists agent, 
tiotropium, in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has been linked in 
some reports to an increase in adverse cardiovascular effects. Decreased heart 
rate variability (HRV) is a condition seen in COPD patients that has also been 
linked to poor cardiovascular outcome. We aimed in this study to investigate 
changes in HRV caused by tiotropium administration to COPD patients in order to 
determine whether changes occurred that might contribute to an increase in 
adverse cardiovascular events.
METHODS: Seventy patients with moderate-to-severe stable COPD were treated with 
once-daily dosing of tiotropium (two puffs of Spiriva Respimat, 2.5 μg solution) 
for 3 months. HRV, pulmonary function, and quality of life were measured before 
and after 1 and 3 months of therapy.
RESULTS: Pulmonary function and quality of life improved significantly, after 
both 1 and 3 months of therapy. No significant change in HRV parameters 
occurred, except for a significant decrease in the high-frequency and increase 
in the low-frequency component of HRV at the 1-month assessment.
CONCLUSION: Changes in HRV caused by tiotropium use are not sufficient to 
explain a possible increase in adverse cardiovascular events.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2014.1125
PMID: 24840562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Diabetes Metab Disord. 2016 Aug 26;15(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s40200-016-0257-3. 
eCollection 2015.

The effect of vitamin D on COPD exacerbation: a double blind randomized 
placebo-controlled parallel clinical trial.

Sanjari M(1), Soltani A(2), Habibi Khorasani A(3), Zareinejad M(4).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Basic and Clinical Physiology 
Institute, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran.
(2)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Clinical Sciences Institute, EBM Group, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Kerman University of medical sciences, 
Kerman, Iran.
(4)Physiology Research Center, Institute of Neuropharmacology, Kerman University 
of Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran.

BACKGROUND: To investigate the effect of supplementation of standard treatment 
(inhaled long-acting beta agonists, anticholinergics and corticosteroids) with 
vitamin D on C reactive protein and pulmonary function tests in patients with 
COPD exacerbation.
DESIGN: Randomized, single-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled parallel 
trial. One teaching hospital Participants: 135 patients in pulmonary ward with 
moderate to severe COPD and exacerbations.120 patients fulfilled the study 
protocol.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomly divided into three groups receiving 7 day 
treatment with 0.25 μg calcitriol daily (n = 45), 50000 IU daily of vitamin D 
(n = 45) or placebo (n = 45). An independent nurse was responsible for 
allocation, preparation, and accounting of trial medications.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Maximal expiratory flow volume (FEV1) and forced volume 
capacity curves (FVC) and Modified Medical Research Council (MMRC) scale.
RESULTS: Out of 135 patients who were recruited consecutively, 45 patients 
randomly were randomly assigned in three groups (balance blocked 
randomization.15 patients were dropped out due to non-compliance for second PFT. 
Intention to treat analysis was carried out for 120 participants. The difference 
between before and after treatment FEV1 and FEV1/FVC ratio had no significant 
difference between treatment groups and placebo. (P = 0.43, P = 0.51, 
respectively)but clinical improvement was significant in patients who received 
calcitriol. No side effects were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Short term treatment with either calcitriol or 25(OH) 2Vit D didn't 
changed FEV1 or FVC in vitamin D sufficient patients with COPD exacerbation; 
nevertheless it can provide clinical benefit.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Iranian Registry of Clinical Trials no. IRCT138712271774N1. 
Registered 10 April 2011.

DOI: 10.1186/s40200-016-0257-3
PMCID: PMC5002185
PMID: 27570748


453. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;13:1753466619853500. doi: 
10.1177/1753466619853500.

The efficacy of adding budesonide/formoterol to ipratropium plus theophylline in 
managing severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: an open-label, randomized 
study in China.

Huang K(1)(2), Guo Y(3), Kang J(4), An L(5)(2), Zheng Z(6), Ma L(7), Peng L(8), 
Wang H(9), Su R(10), Itoh Y(11), Wang C(12)(13)(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Chao-Yang 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, China.
(2)Beijing Institute of Respiratory Medicine, China.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Hospital, 
Ministry of Health, Dongdan, China.
(4)The First Hospital of China Medical University, Heping, Shenyang, China.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Chao-Yang 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(6)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Yuexiu, China.
(7)Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, China.
(8)Jilin University First Hospital, Changchun, China.
(9)Hebei United University Affiliated Hospital, Tangshan, China.
(10)Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca, Shanghai, China.
(11)Biometrics, AstraZeneca, Osaka, Japan.
(12)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Hospital, China.
(13)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center of Respiratory 
Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(14)National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Diseases, Beijing, China.
(15)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China.
(16)Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Patients diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
in China are commonly prescribed ipratropium plus theophylline (I+T) therapy. 
Studies have shown that an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting beta-agonist 
(LABA) combination is also efficacious in reducing symptoms and exacerbations. 
This study evaluated the efficacy and tolerability of adding 
budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FORM) to I+T in Chinese patients with severe COPD.
METHODS: A randomized, parallel-group, open-label, multicenter phase IV study 
(Clinical Trials.gov identifier: NCT01415518) was conducted in China. Patients 
received either BUD/FORM (160/4.5 µg; two inhalations twice daily [bid] via 
Turbuhaler®) + I (20 µg per inhalation, two inhalations four times daily) + T 
(100 mg bid) or I+T alone for 12 weeks. The primary efficacy variable was change 
from baseline in predose forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1).
RESULTS: A total of 584 patients were randomized equally between treatment 
groups. At the end of the study, the BUD/FORM plus I+T group displayed 
significant improvements in predose FEV1 versus the I+T group (between-group 
difference 6.9%; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 4.3, 9.6; p < 0.0001). Forced 
vital capacity, inspiratory capacity, peak expiratory flow and health-related 
quality of life (HRQoL) scores were significantly improved (all p < 0.0001) and 
exacerbation frequency was reduced (43.5% reduction; rate ratio 0.565, 95% CI 
0.325, 0.981; p = 0.0425) with BUD/FORM plus I+T versus I+T alone.
CONCLUSION: Patients with severe COPD in China treated with BUD/FORM plus I+T 
showed significant improvements in lung function and HRQoL and a reduction in 
exacerbations compared with I+T alone. Both treatments were well tolerated and 
no safety concerns were noted. The reviews of this paper are available via the 
supplemental material section.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466619853500
PMCID: PMC6595664
PMID: 31240995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: Rong Su and 
Yohji Itoh are current employees of AstraZeneca. Kewu Huang, Yanfei Guo, Jian 
Kang, Li An, Zeguang Zheng, Lijun Ma, Liping Peng, Hongyang Wang, and Chen Wang 
declare that they have no competing interests.


454. Multidiscip Respir Med. 2019 Feb 5;14:7. doi: 10.1186/s40248-019-0168-5. 
eCollection 2019.

Predictive factors for exacerbation and re-exacerbation in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: an extension of the Cox model to analyze data from the Swiss 
COPD cohort.

Urwyler P(1), Abu Hussein N(2), Bridevaux PO(3), Chhajed PN(1), Geiser T(4), 
Grendelmeier P(1), Joos Zellweger L(5), Kohler M(6), Maier S(1), Miedinger D(1), 
Tamm M(2), Thurnheer R(7), Dieterle T(1), Leuppi JD(1).

Author information:
(1)1University Clinic of Medicine, Cantonal Hospital Baselland, University of 
Basel, Rheinstrasse 26, 4410 Liestal, Switzerland.
(2)2University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, Spitalstrasse 21, 4031 
Basel, Switzerland.
(3)3Hospital of Valais, University of Geneva, Avenue du Grand-Champsec 80, 1950 
Sion, Switzerland.
(4)4University Hospital Bern (Inselspital), University of Bern, Freiburgstrasse 
18, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(5)5St. Clara Hospital, University of Basel, Kleinriehenstrasse 30, 4002 Basel, 
Switzerland.
(6)6University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Rämistrasse 100, 8091 
Zürich, Switzerland.
(7)Cantonal Hospital of Muensterlingen, Spitalcampus 1, 8596 Münsterlingen, 
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The Swiss COPD cohort was established in 2006 to collect data in a 
primary care setting. The objective of this study was to evaluate possible 
predictive factors for exacerbation and re-exacerbation.
METHODS: In order to predict exacerbation until the next visit based on the 
knowledge of exacerbation since the last visit, a multistate model described by 
Therneau and Grambsch was performed.
RESULTS: Data of 1,247 patients (60.4% males, 46.6% current smokers) were 
analyzed, 268 (21.5%) did not fulfill spirometric diagnostic criteria for COPD. 
Data of 748 patients (63% males, 44.1% current smokers) were available for model 
analysis. In order to predict exacerbation an extended Cox Model was performed. 
Mean FEV1/FVC-ratio was 53.1% (±11.5), with a majority of patients in COPD GOLD 
classes 2 or 3. Hospitalization for any reason (HR1.7; P = 0.04) and pronounced 
dyspnea (HR for mMRC grade four 3.0; P < 0.001) at most recent visit as well as 
prescription of short-acting bronchodilators (HR1.7; P < 0.001), inhaled (HR1.2; 
P = 0.005) or systemic corticosteroids (HR1.8; P = 0.015) were significantly 
associated with exacerbation when having had no exacerbation at most recent 
visit. Higher FEV1/FVC (HR0.9; P = 0.008) and higher FEV1 values (HR0.9; 
P = 0.001) were protective. When already having had an exacerbation at the most 
recent visit, pronounced dyspnea (HR for mMRC grade 4 1.9; P = 0.026) and 
cerebrovascular insult (HR2.1; P = 0.003) were significantly associated with 
re-exacerbation. Physical activity (HR0.6; P = 0.031) and treatment with 
long acting beta agonistss (HR0.7; P = 0.044) seemed to play a significant 
protective role. In a best subset model for exacerbation, higher FEV1 
significantly reduced and occurrence of sputum increased the probability of 
exacerbation. In the same model for re-exacerbation, coronary heart disease 
increased and hospitalization at most recent visit seemed to reduce the risk for 
re-exacerbation.
CONCLUSION: Our data confirmed well-established risk factors for exacerbations 
whilst analyzing their predictive association with exacerbation and 
re-exacerbation. This study confirmed the importance of spirometry in primary 
care, not only for diagnosis but also as a risk evaluation for possible future 
exacerbations.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Our study got approval by local ethical committee in 2006 
(EK Nr. 170/06) and was registered retrospectively on ClinicalTrials.gov 
(NCT02065921, 19th of February 2014).

DOI: 10.1186/s40248-019-0168-5
PMCID: PMC6364405
PMID: 30774953

Conflict of interest statement: We received ethical approval for this study by 
the local ethical committee (Ethikkommission Nordwest- und Zentralschweiz 
(EKNZ), formerly Ethikkommission beider Basel (EKBB)) in 2006 (EK Nr. 170/06) 
and subsequently by ethical committees of all other participating Swiss cantons. 
The study was also registered on ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02065921).Not 
applicable.The authors declare that they have no competing interests in relation 
to the work described.Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


455. Cureus. 2019 Apr 10;11(4):e4428. doi: 10.7759/cureus.4428.

The Role of Revefenacin in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Maqsood MH(1), Rubab K(1), Maqsood MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, King Edward Medical University / Mayo Hospital, Lahore, 
PAK.
(2)Community Medicine, Combined Military Hospital Lahore Medical College, 
Faisalabad, PAK.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic inflammatory lung 
disease characterized by progressive and persistent airflow limitation that is 
not fully reversible. Revefenacin is an investigational long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA), in late-stage development as a nebulized inhalation solution, 
which has been designed to produce long-acting bronchodilation, consistent with 
once-daily dosing, and with a high degree of lung-selectivity. It is more 
selective for muscarinic type 3 (M3) than muscarinic type 2 (M2) or muscarinic 
type 1 (M1) receptors. Its dissociation half-life for M3 is 82 minutes and 6.9 
minutes for M1, respectively. The bronchoprotective effect is seen as early as 
five-minute post-dose and is sustained for up to 24 hours. The estimated 24-hour 
potency (expressed as the concentration of dosing solution) is 45.0 
mg/ml. Once-daily dose of revefenacin provided long-term improvement in trough 
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1). It improved day 28 trough FEV1 
over placebo significantly (p < 0.001). M3: M2 receptor half-life is 12 compared 
to the other antagonists that have M3: M2 receptor half-life around 6.0. A 
24-hour serial spirometry, on day 84, showed that revefenacin 88 or 175 µg was 
associated with significant (p <0.01) improvements in trough FEV1 at all time 
points compared with placebo. Revefenacin is generally well-tolerated and unlike 
the other anti-muscarinics, it has no systemic anti-cholinergic adverse effects.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.4428
PMCID: PMC6559386
PMID: 31245215

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


456. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Oct 13;10:2185-92. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S91901. eCollection 2015.

Effect of tiotropium on lung function decline in early-stage of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease patients: propensity score-matched analysis of 
real-world data.

Lee HY(1), Choi SM(1), Lee J(1), Park YS(1), Lee CH(1), Kim DK(2), Lee SM(1), 
Yoon HI(3), Yim JJ(1), Kim YW(1), Han SK(1), Yoo CG(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea ; 
Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea ; Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul 
Metropolitan Government-Seoul National University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea ; Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul 
National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium failed to slow the annual rate of forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) decline in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) patients with <70% predicted FEV1. However, the rate of FEV1 decline is 
known to be faster at early stages, which suggests that the effects of 
tiotropium may be more prominent in early-stage of COPD patients. The aim of 
this study was to test the hypothesis that tiotropium modifies the rate of FEV1 
decline in COPD patients with an FEV1≥70%.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the records of COPD patients diagnosed 
between January 1, 2004, and July 31, 2012, at Seoul National University 
Hospital, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, and Seoul Metropolitan 
Government-Seoul National University Boramae Medical Center. The inclusion 
criteria were as follows: age ≥40 years, postbron-chodilator (BD) FEV1≥70% of 
predicted and FEV1/FVC (forced vital capacity) <0.70, and spirometry more than 
two times at certain times of the year. Conversely, the exclusion criteria were 
as follows: asthma, lung cancer, pulmonary tuberculosis, pulmonary resection, or 
long-term use of a short-acting muscarinic antagonist. The annual lung function 
decline in patients using tiotropium was compared with that in patients not 
using the drug.
RESULTS: Of the 587 patients enrolled in the study, 257 took tiotropium. 
Following propensity score matching, 404 patients were included in the analysis. 
The mean annual rate of post-BD FEV1 decline was 23.9 (tiotropium) and 22.5 
(control) mL/yr (P=0.86); corresponding pre-BD values were 30.4 and 21.9 mL/yr 
(P=0.31), respectively. Mean annual rate of post-BD FVC decline was 55.1 
(tiotropium) and 43.5 (control) mL/yr (P=0.33); corresponding pre-BD values were 
37.1 and 33.3 mL/yr (P=0.13).
CONCLUSION: Therefore, tiotropium does not reduce the rate of lung function 
decline in COPD patients with FEV1≥70%.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S91901
PMCID: PMC4610709
PMID: 26508848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. COPD. 2017 Oct;14(5):526-532. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2017.1344627. Epub 2017 Jul 
26.

Pharmacological characterization of the interaction between tiotropium and 
olodaterol administered at 5:5 concentration-ratio in equine bronchi.

Calzetta L(1), Rogliani P(1), Mattei M(2), Alfonsi P(3), Cito G(4), Pistocchini 
E(5), Cazzola M(1), Matera MG(6).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Systems Medicine , University of Rome Tor Vergata , Rome , 
Italy.
(2)b Department of Biology, Centro Servizi Interdipartimentale-STA , University 
of Rome Tor Vergata , Rome , Italy.
(3)c ASL Roma 2, UOC Igiene degli Allevamenti e delle Produzioni Zootecniche , 
Rome , Italy.
(4)d ASL Roma 2, UOC Tutela igienico sanitaria degli alimenti di origine animale 
, Rome , Italy.
(5)e CDVet, Laboratorio Analisi Veterinarie , Rome , Italy.
(6)f Department of Experimental Medicine , University of Campania Luigi 
Vanvitelli , Naples , Italy.

Equine airways represent a suitable ex vivo model to study the functional impact 
of pharmacological treatments on human chronic obstructive pulmonary disorders, 
such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We aimed to 
characterize the pharmacological interaction between the long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) tiotropium and the long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) olodaterol in 
equine airways. The effect of tiotropium and olodaterol, administered alone and 
in combination at the ratio of concentrations reproducing ex vivo the 
concentration-ratio delivered by the currently available fixed-dose combination 
(FDC) (5:5), was investigated on the cholinergic contractile tone induced by the 
parasympathetic activation of equine isolated airways. The drug interaction was 
analysed by using the Bliss Independence and Unified Theory models. Both 
tiotropium and olodaterol induced a sub-maximal concentration-dependent 
inhibition of bronchial contractility (Emax: tiotropium 83.6 ± 14.8%, olodaterol 
76.9 ± 17.9%; pEC50: tiotropium 8.2 ± 0.5; olodaterol 8.3 ± 0.6). When 
administered at 5:5 concentration-ratio, tiotropium plus olodaterol completely 
inhibited the bronchial contractility (Emax 102.7 ± 8.4%; pEC50 9.0 ± 0.7). 
Strong synergistic interaction was detected for tiotropium/olodaterol 
combination (combination index 0.011). When administered at low concentrations, 
the drug mixture elicited up to 94.6 ± 9.5% effect that was 36.0 ± 8.1% greater 
than the expected additive effect. The results of this study demonstrate that 
the co-administration of tiotropium plus olodaterol at 5:5 concentration-ratio 
leads to synergistic inhibition of equine bronchial contractility when compared 
with either drug administered alone. These findings suggest that the currently 
available LABA/LABA FDC may be effective in delivering tiotropium/olodaterol 
combination at equipotency concentrations of each monocomponent into the lung 
and, thus, inducing synergistic effect in the airways.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2017.1344627
PMID: 28745522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2019 Oct 23;6(4):341-9. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.6.4.2019.0139.

The Role of Guaifenesin in the Management of Chronic Mucus Hypersecretion 
Associated with Stable Chronic Bronchitis: A Comprehensive Review.

Ohar JA(1), Donohue JF(2), Spangenthal S(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy, and Immunological Diseases, 
Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
(2)Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
(3)Internal Medicine & Pulmonology, Charlotte Lung & Health Center, Charlotte, 
North Carolina.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is the third leading cause of death and 
disease burden worldwide. It includes a spectrum of diseases including chronic 
bronchitis which is characterized by overproduction, hypersecretion and 
decreased elimination of mucus. Chronic bronchitis has numerous clinical 
consequences, including predisposition to lower respiratory tract infections, 
accelerated decline in lung function, increased exacerbation rate and decreased 
health-related quality of life. Although the inflammatory mechanisms responsible 
for mucus cell metaplasia in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and stable 
chronic bronchitis are poorly understood, the main goals of therapy are to 
decrease mucus hypersecretion by controlling inflammation and to increase mucus 
clearance. Non-pharmacological measures include smoking cessation and chest 
physiotherapy. Pharmacological interventions include expectorants and mucolytics 
together with long-acting beta2-adrenergic receptor agonists, anticholinergics, 
glucocorticoids, phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors, antioxidants, and antibiotics. 
Guaifenesin is an expectorant that is thought to increase hydration and decrease 
viscosity of mucus leading to improved clearance of accumulated secretions from 
the upper and lower airway. Although guaifenesin has a Food and Drug 
Administration Over-the-Counter (OFC) Monograph indication to "help loosen 
phlegm (mucus) and thin bronchial secretions in patients with stable chronic 
bronchitis," there is limited published evidence of either mechanism of action 
or clinical efficacy in this disease state. Here we review the pathophysiology 
and consequences of chronic mucus hypersecretion and examine the evidence for 
the use of guaifenesin in patients with stable chronic bronchitis.

JCOPDF © 2019.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.6.4.2019.0139
PMCID: PMC7006698
PMID: 31647856

Conflict of interest statement: All authors participated in a stable chronic 
bronchitis clinical advisory board meeting supported by Reckitt Benckiser in 
September 2018 for which they received a consultancy fee. Additionally, J. Ohar 
reports serving on advisory boards for Theravance, GlaxoSmithKline, Sunovion, 
AstraZeneca, Mylan and Boehringer Ingelheim, conducting an 
investigator-initiated study for Sunovion and manuscript preparation for 
Theravance and Sunovion.


459. Pneumologie. 2019 Jul;73(7):430-438. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-103033. Epub 2019 Jul 
10.

[Refractory Dyspnea in Advanced COPD: Palliative Treatment with Opioids].

[Article in German]

Ficker JH, Brückl WM.

Dyspnea is a leading symptom in COPD. Bronchodilators (long acting 
anticholinergics and long acting beta agonists) are the mainstay of medical 
treatment. Non pharmacological therapies like pulmonary rehabilitation, 
long-term oxygen therapy or lung volume reduction can help to further improve 
dyspnea. Nevertheless, patients with advanced disease may develop refractory 
dyspnea. Randomized controlled trials demonstrated that the palliative treatment 
with low-dose systemic opioids is an effective treatment option in these 
patients. A low starting dose (e. g. 1.0 mg morphine, immediate release) is 
recommended. Subsequent doses are titrated to achieve the lowest effective dose 
based on whether dyspnea relief has been achieved and whether any side effects 
have developed. This low-dose opioid treatment has been demonstrated to be safe 
for symptom reduction in severe COPD and is not associated with increased 
hospital admissions or deaths. Physicians should offer a trial of low-dose oral 
opioids to patients with refractory dyspnea that affects their daily activities 
and quality of life.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-103033
PMID: 31291670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autoren geben an, dass kein 
Interessenkonflikt besteht.


460. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2016 Apr;37:9-14. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.01.003. Epub 
2016 Jan 28.

Bronchodilator effects, pharmacokinetics and safety of PSX1002-GB, a novel 
glycopyrronium bromide formulation, in COPD patients; a randomised crossover 
study.

Singh D(1), Ravi A(2), Reid F(1), Buck H(3), O'Connor G(4), Down G(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit Limited, The Langley 
Building, Wythenshawe Hospital, Southmoor Road, M23 9QZ, UK.
(2)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit Limited, The Langley 
Building, Wythenshawe Hospital, Southmoor Road, M23 9QZ, UK. Electronic address: 
ARavi@meu.org.uk.
(3)ClinPsy Limited, St. Albans, Hertfordshire, UK.
(4)The Clinical Trial Company, Knutsford, Cheshire, UK.
(5)Prosonix Limited (part of Circassia Limited, Oxford, UK), Oxford, UK.

AIMS: To establish the dose-response relationship for pharmacodynamics 
(bronchodilatation), safety and pharmacokinetics of a novel particle engineered 
formulation of Glycopyrronium bromide (PSX1002-GB) in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Patients with moderate to severe COPD with bronchodilator reversible 
lung function were enrolled into this randomized, placebo-controlled, 
double-blind, dose-ranging, single dose, five way cross-over study (n = 37). 
Patients received single doses of PSX1002-GB (12.5-100 μg) via pMDI with 
one-week washouts between treatments.
RESULTS: PSX1002-GB caused a bronchodilator response observed at 5 min post-dose 
at all doses. Significant improvements in mean change from baseline FEV1 at 24 h 
were seen at all doses compared with placebo; Mean changes were 0.071L (95% CI 
0.041-0.101), 0.087L (95% CI 0.056-0.118), 0.102L (95% CI 0.072-0.133) and 
0.120L (95% CI 0.089-0.150) for 12.5, 25, 50 and 100 μg respectively. PSX1002-GB 
50 and 100 mcg caused rapid bronchodilation at 5 min after dosing. PSX1002-GB 
was well tolerated with similar adverse event rates reported compared to 
placebo. There were no clinically relevant changes in heart rate, blood pressure 
or ECG parameters (including QTc interval).
CONCLUSION: Single doses of PSX1002-GB (12.5-100 μg) were well tolerated. 
PSX1002-GB 50 and 100 mcg delivered by pMDI produced rapid onset bronchodilation 
that was sustained over a 24 h period.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.01.003
PMID: 26827913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Br J Pharmacol. 2019 Aug;176(16):2864-2876. doi: 10.1111/bph.14707. Epub 2019 
Jul 2.

Second M(3) muscarinic receptor binding site contributes to bronchoprotection by 
tiotropium.

Kistemaker LEM(1)(2), Elzinga CRS(1)(2), Tautermann CS(3), Pieper MP(4), 
Seeliger D(3), Alikhil S(1)(2), Schmidt M(1)(2), Meurs H(1)(2), Gosens R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, 
Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
(4)Immunology and Respiratory Disease Research, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH 
& Co. KG, Biberach an der Riss, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The bronchodilator tiotropium binds not only to its main 
binding site on the M3 muscarinic receptor but also to an allosteric site. Here, 
we have investigated the functional relevance of this allosteric binding and the 
potential contribution of this behaviour to interactions with long-acting 
β-adrenoceptor agonists, as combination therapy with anticholinergic agents and 
β-adrenoceptor agonists improves lung function in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: ACh, tiotropium, and atropine binding to M3 receptors 
were modelled using molecular dynamics simulations. Contractions of bovine and 
human tracheal smooth muscle strips were studied.
KEY RESULTS: Molecular dynamics simulation revealed extracellular vestibule 
binding of tiotropium, and not atropine, to M3 receptors as a secondary low 
affinity binding site, preventing ACh entry into the orthosteric binding pocket. 
This resulted in a low (allosteric binding) and high (orthosteric binding) 
functional affinity of tiotropium in protecting against methacholine-induced 
contractions of airway smooth muscle, which was not observed for atropine and 
glycopyrrolate. Moreover, antagonism by tiotropium was insurmountable in nature. 
This behaviour facilitated functional interactions of tiotropium with the 
β-agonist olodaterol, which synergistically enhanced bronchoprotective effects 
of tiotropium. This was not seen for glycopyrrolate and olodaterol or 
indacaterol but was mimicked by the interaction of tiotropium and forskolin, 
indicating no direct β-adrenoceptor-M3 receptor crosstalk in this effect.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: We propose that tiotropium has two binding sites 
at the M3 receptor that prevent ACh action, which, together with slow 
dissociation kinetics, may contribute to insurmountable antagonism and enhanced 
functional interactions with β-adrenoceptor agonists.

© 2019 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.14707
PMCID: PMC6637226
PMID: 31077341

Conflict of interest statement: C.T., M.P., and D.S. are employees of Boehringer 
Ingelheim (BI). L.K. is an employee of Aquilo.


462. Thorax. 2015 Jun;70(6):519-27. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206670. Epub 2015 Apr 
3.

Glycopyrronium once-daily significantly improves lung function and health status 
when combined with salmeterol/fluticasone in patients with COPD: the GLISTEN 
study, a randomised controlled trial.

Frith PA(1), Thompson PJ(2), Ratnavadivel R(3), Chang CL(4), Bremner P(5), Day 
P(6), Frenzel C(7), Kurstjens N(7); Glisten Study Group.

Collaborators: Waddell A, Daniel A, Khoussousi A, Springfield A, Veale A, Graham 
AN, Gallagher B, Pande BR, O'Kane B, Jones C, Baldi C, Helm C, O'Dochartaigh C, 
Chambers D, Quinn D, Yull D, Karthigesu D, Then E, Graham F, Faigenbaum F, 
Geddam G, Cameron G, Blom H, Goldman H, Snell H, Chia I, Jeong J, Liew J, 
Salvaris J, Pryke J, Reid J, Kolbe J, O'Sullivan J, Pak J, Upham J, Feiber J, 
Ford JO, Yong K, Perrin K, Noonan L, Atlas L, Murdoch L, Pearce M, Bloch M, 
Holmes M, Chia M, Epton M, Leadston M, Tandon M, Chitgopeker M, Liebenberg N, 
Hendry N, Olaniyi O, Singh O, Kendall P, Van Niekerk P, Willet R, Tomlins R, 
Pillay S, Sharifeh S, Carson S, Bingham S, Walford T, Erasmus T, Claridge T, 
Hess Z.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Clinical Research Unit, Repatriation General Hospital, Adelaide, 
South Australia, Australia.
(2)The Lung Health Clinic, Centre for Asthma Allergy and Respiratory Research, 
University of Western Australia, and the Lung Institute of Western Australia, 
Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Gosford Hospital, Gosford, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New 
Zealand.
(5)St John of God Hospital, Murdoch, Western Australia, Australia.
(6)Medical Centre, Redcliffe Peninsula 7 Day Medical Centre, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.
(7)Clinical Development and Medical Affairs, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Australia 
Pty Limited, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2015 Oct;70(10):991.

BACKGROUND: The optimal use of various therapeutic combinations for 
moderate/severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is unclear. The 
GLISTEN trial compared the efficacy of two long-acting anti-muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMA), when combined with an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and a 
long-acting beta agonist (LABA).
METHODS: This randomised, blinded, placebo-controlled trial in moderate/severe 
COPD patients compared once-daily glycopyrronium (GLY) 50 µg, once-daily 
tiotropium (TIO) 18 µg or placebo (PLA), when combined with 
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SAL/FP) 50/500 µg twice daily. The primary 
objective was to determine the non-inferiority of GLY+SAL/FP versus TIO+SAL/FP 
on trough FEV1 after 12 weeks. An important secondary objective was whether 
addition of GLY to SAL/FP was better than SAL/FP alone.
RESULTS: 773 patients (mean FEV1 57.2% predicted) were randomised; 84.9% 
completed the trial. At week 12, GLY+SAL/FP demonstrated non-inferiority to 
TIO+SAL/FP for trough FEV1: least square mean treatment difference (LSMdiff) 
-7 mL (SE 17.4) with a lower limit for non-inferiority of -60 mL. There was 
significant increase in week 12 trough FEV1 with GLY+SAL/FP versus PLA+SAL/FP 
(LSMdiff 101 mL, p<0.001). At 12 weeks, GLY+SAL/FP produced significant 
improvement in St George's Respiratory Questionnaire total score versus 
PLA+SAL/FP (LSMdiff -2.154, p=0.02). GLY+SAL/FP demonstrated significant rescue 
medication reduction versus PLA+SAL/FP (LSMdiff -0.72 puffs/day, p<0.001). 
Serious adverse events were similar for GLY+SAL/FP, TIO+SAL/FP and PLA+SAL/FP 
with an incidence of 5.8%, 8.5% and 5.8%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: GLY+SAL/FP showed comparable improvements in lung function, health 
status and rescue medication to TIO+SAL/FP. Importantly, addition of GLY to 
SAL/FP demonstrated significant improvements in lung function, health status and 
rescue medication compared to SAL/FP.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01513460.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206670
PMCID: PMC4453631
PMID: 25841237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Respir Res. 2017 Jul 28;18(1):145. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0627-5.

Interactions between glycopyrronium and indacaterol on cholinergic 
neurotransmission and contractile response in bovine trachealis.

Baroffio M(1), Barisione G(2), Brusasco V(3).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialità Mediche, Università di Genova, 
Viale Benedetto XV 6, 16132, Genoa, Italy. michele.baroffio@unige.it.
(2)Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Largo R. Benzi 10, 16132, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialità Mediche, Università di Genova, 
Viale Benedetto XV 6, 16132, Genoa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Muscarinic-receptor antagonists and β-adrenoceptor agonists are 
used, alone or in combination, as first-line treatment for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. Both drugs decrease airway smooth muscle tone by 
post-junctional mechanisms but they may have opposing effects on pre-junctional 
acetylcholine (ACh)-release.
METHODS: We studied the effects of the muscarinic-receptor antagonist 
glycopyrronium (GLY), the β-adrenoceptor agonist indacaterol (IND) and their 
combination on electrically-induced ACh-release and contractile response in 
isolated bovine trachealis. Data were analyzed by paired t-test and analysis of 
variance for repeated or independent measures with Newmann-Keuls post-hoc test 
when appropriate.
RESULTS: GLY 10-8 M decreased contractile response by 19 ± 6% (p = 0.010) 
without altering ACh-release. GLY 10-7 M and 10-6 M almost abolished contractile 
responses even if the ACh-release was increased by 27 ± 19% (p < 0.001) and 
20 ± 8% (p = 0.004), respectively. IND 10-7 M had no significant effects on 
contractile response and ACh-release, whereas IND 10-6 M reduced contractile 
response by 24 ± 12% (p = 0.002) without altering ACh-release. IND 10-5 M 
decreased contractile response by 51 ± 17% (p < 0.001) and ACh-release by 
22 ± 11% (p = 0.004). Co-incubation with GLY 10-8 M and IND 10-7 M did not alter 
ACh-release but inhibited contractile response by 41 ± 8% (p < 0.001). The 
latter effect was greater than with GLY 10-8 M, or IND 10-7 M, or IND 10-6 M 
given separately (p < 0.001 for all). The increment of ACh-release caused by GLY 
was attenuated by IND 10-5 M, though this did not affect contractile response.
CONCLUSIONS: At equimolar concentration, GLY alone attenuates airway smooth 
muscle contraction more than IND, despite an increased ACh-release. Combination 
of GLY with IND at submaximal concentrations has more than additive effect 
suggesting a synergistic post-junctional effect. Adding GLY to IND provides a 
greater inhibitory effect on airway smooth muscle contraction than increasing 
IND concentration.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0627-5
PMCID: PMC5534043
PMID: 28754132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL: Bovine tracheas were obtained, 
after permissions, from BLM Carni S.r.l., via Brughiera 10, 16030 Tribogna, 
Genoa and Fasce Gian Mario Ditta Individuale, via Recroso 241/bis, 16024 
Lumarzo, Genoa. Ethical approval was not required because none of the authors 
was involved in the care or killing of the animals. Bovine care and slaughtering 
procedures were done according to the Italian law. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: M.B. and G.B. have no competing interests to 
declare. V.B. has acted in a consultancy capacity and given lectures and has 
received fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Dompé, GSK, Menarini, Novartis, 
AstraZeneca, Almirall. V.B. institution has received research support from 
Novartis and Chiesi. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


464. COPD. 2015 Jun;12(3):233-9. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2014.933795. Epub 2014 Aug 5.

Determinants of Long-Term Persistence with Tiotropium Bromide for Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Tanaka K(1), Kamiishi N, Miyata J, Kabata H, Masaki K, Ogura-Tomomatsu H, 
Tomomatsu K, Suzuki Y, Fukunaga K, Sayama K, Betsuyaku T, Asano K.

Author information:
(1)1Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University 
School of Medicine , Tokyo , Japan.

Tiotropium bromide, a long acting beta agonists agent, improves pulmonary 
function and quality of life of patients suffering from chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). We retrospectively examined the factors that determine 
the long-term persistence with tiotropium bromide. Among 6,301 patients who 
underwent pulmonary function tests in our pulmonary clinic between 2006 and 
2009, 644 met the following criteria: 1) age > 40 years, 2) ≥ 20 pack-years 
smoking history, and 3) forced expiratory volume in 1 sec / forced vital 
capacity ratio < 0.7. The clinical information, including the prescription of 
tiotropium, was obtained from the patients' records. Tiotropium was administered 
to 255 patients (40%), of whom 48 (19%) discontinued treatment within 1 year, 
and 65 (25%) discontinued treatment within the median observation period of 32 
months. The drug was discontinued because of ineffectiveness in 35 patients 
(73%), and because of adverse drug effects in 13 patients (27%). Young age, 
current smoking, absence of respiratory symptoms alleviation, and less severe 
disease characterized by a) mild airflow limitation, b) mild to moderate 
emphysema, or c) no exacerbation of COPD during the 1(st) year of treatment were 
predictors of drug discontinuation.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2014.933795
PMID: 25093464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 May 3;13:1469-1481. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S158552. eCollection 2018.

Tiotropium inhibits methacholine-induced extracellular matrix production via 
β-catenin signaling in human airway smooth muscle cells.

Huo Y(1), Guan L(1), Xu J(1), Zhou L(1), Chen R(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of 
Respiratory Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Airway remodeling is an important feature of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) that is associated with disease severity and 
irreversible airflow limitation. An extensive alteration of the extracellular 
matrix (ECM) surrounding the airway smooth muscle (ASM) bundle is one of the 
pathological manifestations of airway remodeling, which contributes to the 
decline in lung function. Tiotropium, a long-acting inhaled muscarinic receptor 
antagonist, has been confirmed to play a role in preventing airway remodeling 
including ECM deposition beyond bronchodilation in vivo, but the relationship 
between ASM cell (ASMC) relaxation and ECM production remains unclear.
PURPOSE: In this study, we attempted to investigate the influence of tiotropium 
on ECM production by ASMCs and the underlying mechanism.
METHODS: Tiotropium was added 30 minutes before the addition of methacholine to 
primary cultured human ASMCs. Protein expression was analylized by Western Blot 
and mRNA abundance was determined by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: We found that tiotropium reduced collagen I protein expression, and the 
mRNA abundance of collagen I, fibronectin, and versican. β-catenin signaling was 
inactivated by inhibiting glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) phosphorylation in 
this process. Tiotropum inhibited the amount of active β-catenin and its 
transcription activity. Furthermore, overexpression of active β-catenin by 
adenoviruses carrying the S33Y mutant resisted the suppressive effect of 
tiotropium on collagen I protein expression. However, silencing β-catenin by 
specific small interfering RNA enhanced the negative effect of tiotropium.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that relaxation of ASMCs by tiotropium can 
prevent ECM production through β-catenin signaling.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S158552
PMCID: PMC5939907
PMID: 29765214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


466. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2015 Mar;79(3):492-500. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12517.

Efficacy and safety of nebulized glycopyrrolate for administration using a high 
efficiency nebulizer in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Leaker BR(1), Barnes PJ, Jones CR, Tutuncu A, Singh D.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Clinical Trials Ltd, London, UK.

AIMS: To establish the dose-response for pharmacodynamics (bronchodilatation), 
safety and pharmacokinetics for a nebulized formulation of the long acting 
muscarinic antagonist glycopyrrolate (EP-101) with a high efficiency nebulizer 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Patients with moderate to severe COPD (GOLD II/III), with reversible 
lung function, were enrolled into this randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, six period crossover study (n = 42). Patients received 
single doses of EP-101 (12.5-400 μg) and placebo via a high efficiency nebulizer 
(eFlow® PARI nebulizer), with washout between treatments. Plasma 
pharmacokinetics were assessed in a subset of patients (n = 11).
RESULTS: All treatments were well tolerated with similar adverse event rates 
reported with placebo and at all doses. There were no clinically relevant 
changes in heart rate, systolic and diastolic blood pressure or in ECG 
parameters including QTc interval. Following treatment with EP-101 at all doses 
there was a rapid bronchodilator response within 5 min. Significant improvements 
in mean change from baseline FEV1 at 24 h were reported at doses ≥ 50 μg 
compared with placebo, with a clear dose-response relationship. Mean changes in 
FEV1 were 0.10 l (95% CI 0.06, 0.14) and 0.12 l (95% CI 0.08, 0.16) for 100 μg 
and 200 μg, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Single doses of EP-101 ranging from 12.5 μg to 400 μg were well 
tolerated. EP-101 delivered by high efficiency nebulizer device produced a rapid 
onset of bronchodilatation with clinically meaningful improvements in lung 
function maintained over a 24 h period at all doses >50 μg.

© 2014 The Authors. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12517
PMCID: PMC4345959
PMID: 25243340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


467. BMC Pulm Med. 2016 Feb 10;16:28. doi: 10.1186/s12890-016-0191-7.

Risk factors for COPD exacerbations in inhaled medication users: the COPDGene 
study biannual longitudinal follow-up prospective cohort.

Busch R(1), Han MK(2), Bowler RP(3), Dransfield MT(4), Wells JM(5), Regan EA(6), 
Hersh CP(7); COPDGene Investigators.

Collaborators: Crapo J, Silverman E, Make B, Regan E, Beaty T, Laird N, Lange C, 
Cho M, Santorico S, Hokanson J, Hansel N, Hersh C, Castaldi P, McDonald ML, Wan 
E, Hardin M, Hetmanski J, Parker M, Foreman M, Hobbs B, Busch R, El-Boueiz A, 
Castaldi P, Hardin M, Qiao D, Regan E, Halper-Stromberg E, Begum F, Won S, Lutz 
S, Lynch DA, Coxson HO, Han MK, Hoffman EA, Humphries S, Jacobson FL, Judy PF, 
Kazerooni EA, Newell JD Jr, Regan E, Ross JC, Estepar RS, Stoel BC, Tschirren J, 
van Rikxoort E, van Ginneken B, Washko G, Wilson CG, Al Qaisi M, Gray T, Kluiber 
A, Mann T, Sieren J, Stinson D, Schroeder J, Van Beek E, Jensen R, Everett D, 
Faino A, Strand M, Wilson C, Hokanson JE, Kinney G, Lutz S, Young K, Pratte K, 
Duca L, Curtis JL, Martinez CH, Pernicano PG, Hanania N, Alapat P, Bandi V, Atik 
M, Boriek A, Guntupalli K, Guy E, Parulekar A, Nachiappan A, DeMeo D, Hersh C, 
Washko G, Jacobson F, Barr R, Thomashow B, Austin J, D'Souza B, Pearson GD, 
Rozenshtein A, MacIntyre N Jr, Washington L, McAdams H, McEvoy C, Tashjian J, 
Wise R, Hansel N, Brown R, Horton K, Putcha N, Casaburi R, Adami A, Porszasz J, 
Fischer H, Budoff M, Rossiter H, Sharafkhaneh A, Lan C, Wendt C, Bell B, Foreman 
M, Westney G, Berkowitz E, Bowler R, Lynch D, Rosiello R, Pace D, Criner G, 
Ciccolella D, Cordova F, Dass C, D'Alonzo G, Desai P, Jacobs M, Kelsen S, Kim V, 
Mamary J, Marchetti N, Satti A, Shenoy K, Steiner RM, Swift A, Swift I, 
Vega-Sanchez ME, Dransfield M, Bailey W, Wells J, Bhatt S, Nath H, Ramsdell J, 
Friedman P, Soler X, Yen A, Cornellas A, Newell J Jr, Thompson B, Han M, 
Kazerooni E, Martinez C, Billings J, Allen T, Sciurba F, Chandra D, Weissfeld J, 
Fuhrman C, Bon J, Anzueto A, Adams S, Maselli-Caceres D, Ruiz ME.

Author information:
(1)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. 
rerbu@channing.harvard.edu.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA. mrking@med.umich.edu.
(3)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA. 
BowlerR@njhealth.org.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. mdrans99@uab.edu.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. jmwells@uab.edu.
(6)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA. 
regane@njhealth.org.
(7)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. 
craig.hersh@channing.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Despite inhaled medications that decrease exacerbation risk, some 
COPD patients experience frequent exacerbations. We determined prospective risk 
factors for exacerbations among subjects in the COPDGene Study taking inhaled 
medications.
METHODS: 2113 COPD subjects were categorized into four medication use patterns: 
triple therapy with tiotropium (TIO) plus long-acting 
beta-agonist/inhaled-corticosteroid (ICS ± LABA), tiotropium alone, ICS ± LABA, 
and short-acting bronchodilators. Self-reported exacerbations were recorded in 
telephone and web-based longitudinal follow-up surveys. Associations with 
exacerbations were determined within each medication group using four separate 
logistic regression models. A head-to-head analysis compared exacerbation risk 
among subjects using tiotropium vs. ICS ± LABA.
RESULTS: In separate logistic regression models, the presence of 
gastroesophageal reflux, female gender, and higher scores on the St. George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire were significant predictors of exacerbator status 
within multiple medication groups (reflux: OR 1.62-2.75; female gender: OR 1.53 
- OR 1.90; SGRQ: OR 1.02-1.03). Subjects taking either ICS ± LABA or tiotropium 
had similar baseline characteristics, allowing comparison between these two 
groups. In the head-to-head comparison, tiotropium users showed a trend towards 
lower rates of exacerbations (OR = 0.69 [95 % CI 0.45, 1.06], p = 0.09) compared 
with ICS ± LABA users, especially in subjects without comorbid asthma (OR = 0.56 
[95% CI 0.31, 1.00], p = 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Each common COPD medication usage group showed unique risk factor 
patterns associated with increased risk of exacerbations, which may help 
clinicians identify subjects at risk. Compared to similar subjects using 
ICS ± LABA, those taking tiotropium showed a trend towards reduced exacerbation 
risk, especially in subjects without asthma.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00608764, first received 1/28/2008.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-016-0191-7
PMCID: PMC4748594
PMID: 26861867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Pneumonol Alergol Pol. 2015;83(2):164-70. doi: 10.5603/PiAP.2015.0026.

Cardiovascular safety of two bronchodilators' fixed-dose combination: 
indacaterol and glycopyrronium.

Kozielski J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine with the Division of Dentistry in Zabrze, Department of 
Lung Diseases and Tuberculosis, Medical University of Silesia in Katowice, 
Poland. ftpulmza@sum.edu.pl.

Combination therapy with anticholinergics and beta-agonists should be used in COPD 
patients after failure of previous monotherapy with one of these drugs. 
Synergistic effect of both mechanisms of bronchodilation can maximize the 
efficacy of separately administered drugs. The effectiveness of the combination 
of LABA and LAMA is already confirmed, nevertheless the question about the 
safety profile of this therapy is still remaining, particularly with regard to 
the cardiovascular system. The paper discusses the overall safety profile of the 
combined preparation compare to placebo as well as the active comparators, 
especially the cardiovascular safety of fixed-dose formulation. Based on the 
data it has been demonstrated, that the combination of two ultra-long-acting 
bronchodilators with different complementary mechanisms of action increases the 
effectiveness of COPD therapy without affecting the safety.

DOI: 10.5603/PiAP.2015.0026
PMID: 25754060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Adv Ther. 2019 Apr;36(4):962-968. doi: 10.1007/s12325-019-00911-y. Epub 2019 Mar 
6.

Dose Determination for a Fixed-Dose Drug Combination: A Phase II Randomized 
Controlled Trial for Tiotropium/Olodaterol Versus Tiotropium in Patients with 
COPD.

Maltais F(1), Hamilton A(2), Voß F(3), Maleki-Yazdi MR(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Center, Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de 
Québec, Université Laval, Québec City, Québec, Canada. 
Francois.Maltais@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd., Burlington, ON, Canada.
(3)Biostatistics and Data Sciences Corp., Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. 
KG, Ingelheim Am Rhein, Germany.
(4)Women's College Hospital, Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Comment in
    Adv Ther. 2019 Dec;36(12):3291-3298.

INTRODUCTION: During the clinical development of a fixed-dose combination of 
drugs, it is best practice to conduct dose-finding studies to determine the 
optimal dose of each component. The aims of this phase II dose-finding study 
were to confirm the lung function benefit of adding olodaterol to tiotropium, 
describe the dose-response relationship of olodaterol in combination with 
tiotropium 5 μg, and compare it with the dose response of olodaterol 
monotherapy.
METHODS: In this double-blind, parallel-group trial, patients were randomized to 
receive either tiotropium 5 μg or a fixed-dose combination of tiotropium 5 μg 
with olodaterol 2 μg, 5 μg, or 10 μg, delivered once daily via the Respimat® for 
4 weeks (NCT00696020). Patients had a diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease and post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) ≥ 30 
and < 80% of predicted normal. The primary endpoint was trough FEV1 response 
(change from baseline) after 4 weeks. Secondary endpoints included FEV1 and 
forced vital capacity (FVC) over 6 h after dosing.
RESULTS: Compared with tiotropium 5 μg, mean (standard error) trough FEV1 
increased with the addition of olodaterol 2 μg by 0.024 L (0.027), olodaterol 
5 μg by 0.033 L (0.027), and olodaterol 10 μg by 0.057 L (0.027). Statistically 
significant improvements in FEV1 versus tiotropium were seen across all 
timepoints up to 6 h with all doses of tiotropium/olodaterol. Similar results 
were observed for FVC.
CONCLUSION: There was a benefit of tiotropium/olodaterol compared with 
tiotropium monotherapy in FEV1 and FVC. There was a dose-response relationship 
for olodaterol on top of tiotropium for FEV1 and FVC similar to the dose 
response previously seen for olodaterol monotherapy. These results, together 
with the results of a study investigating the dose response of tiotropium on top 
of olodaterol, helped to inform the dose selection for the phase III studies.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-019-00911-y
PMCID: PMC6824359
PMID: 30843141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Feb;30:128-33. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.08.002. Epub 
2014 Aug 23.

Comparison of airway dimensions with once daily tiotropium plus indacaterol 
versus twice daily Advair(®) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Hoshino M(1), Ohtawa J(2), Akitsu K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Atami Hospital, International University 
of Health and Welfare, Atami, Japan. Electronic address: hoshino@iuhw.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Radiology, Atami Hospital, International University of Health 
and Welfare, Atami, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Current guidelines recommend combining long-acting bronchodilators 
with different modes of action in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We evaluated the effects of airway 
dimensions and pulmonary function with tiotropium plus indacaterol versus 
Advair(®).
METHODS: Subjects (n = 46) were randomized to receive tiotropium (18 μg once 
daily) plus indacaterol (150 μg once daily) or Advair(®) (50/250 μg twice daily) 
for 16 weeks. Airway geometry was determined by quantitative computed tomography 
(luminal area, Ai; total area of the airway, Ao; wall area, WA; and percentage 
wall area, WA/Ao and wall thickness, T). Spirometry (forced expiratory volume in 
1 s, FEV1; forced vital capacity, FVC and inspiratory capacity, IC) and St. 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) were evaluated.
RESULTS: Tiotropium plus indacaterol significantly increased CT-indices 
including Ai corrected for body surface area (Ai/BSA), and decreased WA/BSA, 
WA/Ao and T/√BSA compared with Advair(®) (p < 0.05, respectively). In 
physiological parameters, mean difference in IC was significantly higher under 
treatment with tiotropium plus indacaterol than Advair(®) (p < 0.05). The 
changes in Ai/BSA, WA/BSA, WA/Ao and T/√BSA were significantly correlated with 
changes in IC (r = 0.535, p = 0.011; r = -0.688, p < 0.001; r = -0.555, 
p = 0.002 and r = -0.542, p = 0.007; respectively). There were more significant 
improvements in SGRQ scores after treatment with tiotropium plus indacaterol 
than Advair(®).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that dual bronchodilation with tiotropium 
plus indacaterol is superior in airway geometry and lung function compared with 
Advair(®) in COPD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.08.002
PMID: 25183687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Bras Pneumol. 2016 Sep-Oct;42(5):367-373. doi: 
10.1590/S1806-37562015000000334.

Effects of indacaterol versus tiotropium on exercise tolerance in patients with 
moderate COPD: a pilot randomized crossover study.

Berton DC(1), Santos ÁH(2), Bohn I Jr(2), Lima RQ(2), Breda V(2), Teixeira 
PJ(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1). Programa de Pós-Graduação em Pneumologia, Faculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul - UFRGS - Porto Alegre (RS) Brasil.
(2). Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre - UFCSPA - Porto 
Alegre (RS) Brasil.
(3). Universidade Feevale, Novo Hamburgo (RS) Brasil.
(4). Pavilhão Pereira Filho, Santa Casa de Misericórdia de Porto Alegre, Porto 
Alegre (RS) Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: To compare a once-daily long-acting beta agonist (indacaterol 150 µg) 
with a once-daily long acting beta agonists (tiotropium 5 µg) in terms of 
their effects on exercise endurance (limit of tolerance, Tlim) in patients with 
moderate COPD. Secondary endpoints were their effects on lung hyperinflation, 
exercise-related dyspnea, and daily-life dyspnea.
METHODS: This was a randomized, single-blind, crossover pilot study involving 20 
patients (mean age, 60.9 ± 10.0 years; mean FEV1, 69 ± 7% of predicted). 
Spirometric parameters, Transition Dyspnea Index scores, Tlim, and exertional 
dyspnea were compared after three weeks of each treatment (with a one-week 
washout period between treatments).
RESULTS: Nineteen patients completed the study (one having been excluded because 
of COPD exacerbation). Improvement in Tlim from baseline tended to be greater 
after treatment with tiotropium than after treatment with indacaterol (96 ± 163 
s vs. 8 ± 82 s; p = 0.06). Tlim significantly improved from baseline after 
treatment with tiotropium (having increased from 396 ± 319 s to 493 ± 347 s; p = 
0.010) but not after treatment with indacaterol (having increased from 393 ± 246 
to 401 ± 254 s; p = 0.678). There were no differences between the two treatments 
regarding improvements in Borg dyspnea scores and lung hyperinflation at 
"isotime" and peak exercise. There were also no significant differences between 
treatments regarding Transition Dyspnea Index scores (1.5 ± 2.1 vs. 0.9 ± 2.3; p 
= 0.39).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with moderate COPD, tiotropium tends to improve Tlim in 
comparison with indacaterol. No significant differences were observed between 
the two treatments regarding their effects on lung hyperinflation, 
exercise-related dyspnea, and daily-life dyspnea. Future studies, including a 
larger number of patients, are required in order to confirm our findings and 
explore mechanistic explanations. (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01693003 
[http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/]).
OBJETIVO: Comparar um beta-agonista de longa duração administrado uma vez por dia 
(indacaterol 150 µg) a um anticolinérgico de longa duração administrado uma vez 
por dia (tiotrópio 5 µg) quanto a seus efeitos na resistência ao exercício 
(limite de tolerância, Tlim) em pacientes com DPOC moderada. Os desfechos 
secundários foram seus efeitos na hiperinsuflação pulmonar, na dispneia causada 
pelo exercício e na dispneia na vida diária.
MÉTODOS: Estudo piloto randomizado cruzado e simples cego com 20 pacientes 
(média de idade: 60,9 ± 10,0 anos; média do VEF1: 69 ± 7% do previsto). 
Parâmetros espirométricos, pontuação no Transition Dyspnea Index, Tlim e 
dispneia aos esforços foram comparados após três semanas de cada tratamento (com 
uma semana de intervalo entre os tratamentos).
RESULTADOS: Dezenove pacientes completaram o estudo - um foi excluído por causa 
de exacerbação da DPOC. A melhora no Tlim tendeu a ser maior com tiotrópio do 
que com indacaterol (96 ± 163 s vs. 8 ± 82 s; p = 0,06). Em comparação com os 
valores basais, o Tlim melhorou significativamente com tiotrópio (aumentando de 
396 ± 319 s para 493 ± 347 s; p = 0,010), mas não com indacaterol (aumentando de 
393 ± 246 para 401 ± 254 s; p = 0,678). Não houve diferença entre os tratamentos 
quanto à melhora na pontuação na escala de dispneia de Borg e na insuflação 
pulmonar no "isotempo" e no pico do exercício. Também não houve diferenças 
significativas entre os tratamentos quanto à pontuação no Transition Dyspnea 
Index (1,5 ± 2,1 vs. 0,9 ± 2,3; p = 0,39).
CONCLUSÕES: Em pacientes com DPOC moderada, o tiotrópio tende a melhorar o Tlim 
em comparação com o indacaterol. Não houve diferenças significativas entre os 
tratamentos quanto a seus efeitos na insuflação pulmonar, na dispneia durante o 
exercício e na dispneia na vida diária. São necessários mais estudos, com um 
número maior de pacientes, para confirmar nossos achados e explorar explicações 
mecanicistas. (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01693003 
[http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/]).

OBJETIVO: Comparar um beta-agonista de longa duração administrado uma vez por dia 
(indacaterol 150 µg) a um anticolinérgico de longa duração administrado uma vez 
por dia (tiotrópio 5 µg) quanto a seus efeitos na resistência ao exercício 
(limite de tolerância, Tlim) em pacientes com DPOC moderada. Os desfechos 
secundários foram seus efeitos na hiperinsuflação pulmonar, na dispneia causada 
pelo exercício e na dispneia na vida diária.
MÉTODOS: Estudo piloto randomizado cruzado e simples cego com 20 pacientes 
(média de idade: 60,9 ± 10,0 anos; média do VEF1: 69 ± 7% do previsto). 
Parâmetros espirométricos, pontuação no Transition Dyspnea Index, Tlim e 
dispneia aos esforços foram comparados após três semanas de cada tratamento (com 
uma semana de intervalo entre os tratamentos).
RESULTADOS: Dezenove pacientes completaram o estudo - um foi excluído por causa 
de exacerbação da DPOC. A melhora no Tlim tendeu a ser maior com tiotrópio do 
que com indacaterol (96 ± 163 s vs. 8 ± 82 s; p = 0,06). Em comparação com os 
valores basais, o Tlim melhorou significativamente com tiotrópio (aumentando de 
396 ± 319 s para 493 ± 347 s; p = 0,010), mas não com indacaterol (aumentando de 
393 ± 246 para 401 ± 254 s; p = 0,678). Não houve diferença entre os tratamentos 
quanto à melhora na pontuação na escala de dispneia de Borg e na insuflação 
pulmonar no "isotempo" e no pico do exercício. Também não houve diferenças 
significativas entre os tratamentos quanto à pontuação no Transition Dyspnea 
Index (1,5 ± 2,1 vs. 0,9 ± 2,3; p = 0,39).
CONCLUSÕES: Em pacientes com DPOC moderada, o tiotrópio tende a melhorar o Tlim 
em comparação com o indacaterol. Não houve diferenças significativas entre os 
tratamentos quanto a seus efeitos na insuflação pulmonar, na dispneia durante o 
exercício e na dispneia na vida diária. São necessários mais estudos, com um 
número maior de pacientes, para confirmar nossos achados e explorar explicações 
mecanicistas. (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01693003 
[http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/])

DOI: 10.1590/S1806-37562015000000334
PMCID: PMC5094874
PMID: 27812637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2017 Oct;46:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.07.003. Epub 
2017 Jul 17.

Pharmacological preclinical characterization of LAS190792, a novel inhaled 
bifunctional muscarinic receptor antagonist /β(2)-adrenoceptor agonist (MABA) 
molecule.

Aparici M(1), Carcasona C(2), Ramos I(2), Montero JL(2), Ortiz JL(3), Cortijo 
J(3), Puig C(2), Vilella D(2), Doe C(2), Gavaldà A(2), Miralpeix M(2).

Author information:
(1)Almirall, R&D Center, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic 
address: monica.aparici@almirall.com.
(2)Almirall, R&D Center, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Valencia, 
Valencia, Spain.

LAS190792 is a novel muscarinic antagonist and beta-adrenoceptor agonist in 
development for chronic respiratory diseases. This study investigated the 
pharmacological profile of LAS190792 in comparison to batefenterol, tiotropium, 
indacaterol and olodaterol. LAS190792 is potent at the human M3 receptor (pIC50: 
8.8 in binding assays). It is selective for the beta-adrenoceptor over the β1-and 
β3-adrenoceptor, and shows a functional potency in a similar range to 
batefenterol and LABA compounds (pEC50 in spontaneous tone isolated trachea: 
9.6). The relaxant potency of LAS190792 in electrically stimulated tissue is 
similar to batefenterol, with an antimuscarinic activity in presence of 
propranolol slightly higher than batefenterol (pIC50 of 8.3 versus 7.9 in human 
tissue). LAS190792 exhibits a sustained duration of action in isolated tissue 
longer than that of batefenterol. Nebulized LAS190792 inhibits 
acetylcholine-induced bronchoconstriction in dog with minimal cardiac effects 
and sustained bronchodilation (t1/2: 13.3 h). In conclusion, these studies 
suggest that LAS190792 is a dual-acting muscarinic antagonist beta-adrenoceptor 
agonist that has the potential to be a next generation bronchodilator with 
long-lasting effects and wide safety margin in humans.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.07.003
PMID: 28729041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Respiration. 2018;95 Suppl 1:19-21. doi: 10.1159/000487181. Epub 2018 Apr 27.

Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium in the Treatment of Severe Respiratory Failure: 
Marked Improvement of Respiratory Failure in a Few Weeks - A Case Report.

Pistelli R, Castriotti MR, Panico L.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a highly prevalent disease, especially 
in the aging population, associated with several functional disabilities and a 
high economic burden. Dual bronchodilation with prefixed associations of 
long-acting beta-agonists and long acting muscarinic antagonist have a significant 
role in the management of this condition. The newer combination, 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium, is useful as a once-a-day therapy and has proven 
superior to other treatment strategies including inhaled corticosteroids for 
improving symptoms and clinical condition with a very rapid effect. We report 
our experience with a patient suffering from severe respiratory failure who 
improved significantly when the indacaterol/glycopyrronium combination was added 
to his therapy.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000487181
PMID: 29705782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Lancet Respir Med. 2015 May;3(5):367-76. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00031-4. 
Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Tiotropium or salmeterol as add-on therapy to inhaled corticosteroids for 
patients with moderate symptomatic asthma: two replicate, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, parallel-group, active-comparator, randomised trials.

Kerstjens HA(1), Casale TB(2), Bleecker ER(3), Meltzer EO(4), Pizzichini E(5), 
Schmidt O(6), Engel M(7), Bour L(8), Verkleij CB(9), Moroni-Zentgraf P(7), 
Bateman ED(10).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Pulmonary Medicine and Tuberculosis, and Groningen Research Institute for Asthma 
and COPD, Groningen, Netherlands. Electronic address: h.a.m.kerstjens@umcg.nl.
(2)Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of South Florida Morsani 
College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA.
(3)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.
(4)Allergy & Asthma Medical Group & Research Center, San Diego, CA, USA.
(5)NUPAIVA (Asthma Research Centre), Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, 
Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil.
(6)KPPK GmbH, Koblenz, Germany.
(7)TA Respiratory Diseases, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co KG, Ingelheim 
am Rhein, Germany.
(8)Biostatistics, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co KG, Biberach an der 
Riss, Germany.
(9)Medical Department, Boehringer Ingelheim bv, Alkmaar, Netherlands.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2015 May;3(5):331-3.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2015 May;3(5):e16-7.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2015 May;3(5):e17.

BACKGROUND: In patients with severe asthma, tiotropium improves lung function 
and exacerbation risk when added to high-dose inhaled corticosteroids plus 
long-acting beta agonists. We aimed to assess the safety and efficacy of 
tiotropium in patients with moderate asthma who were symptomatic despite 
treatment with medium-dose inhaled corticosteroids.
METHODS: We did two 24-week, replicate, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, parallel-group, active-comparator trials at 233 sites in 14 
countries. Eligible patients were aged 18-75 years with symptomatic asthma and a 
pre-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 60-90% predicted 
despite use of medium-dose inhaled corticosteroids, and had never smoked or were 
ex-smokers for 1 year or more with 10 pack-years or less. Patients were randomly 
assigned (1:1:1:1), with computer-generated pseudorandom numbers, to receive 
once-daily tiotropium 5 μg or 2·5 μg, twice-daily salmeterol 50 μg, or placebo, 
while maintaining inhaled corticosteroids. Patients and study investigators were 
masked to treatment allocation. Prespecified co-primary endpoints, assessed at 
week 24 in the full analysis set, were peak FEV1 response, measured within the 
first 3 h after evening dosing; trough FEV1 response; and responder rate 
assessed according to the seven-question Asthma Control Questionnaire (ACQ-7). 
These studies are registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, numbers NCT01172808 and 
NCT01172821.
FINDINGS: Between Aug 24, 2010, and Nov 13, 2012, we randomly assigned 2103 
patients to the tiotropium 5 μg group (n=519), the tiotropium 2·5 μg group 
(n=520), the salmeterol group (n=541), or the placebo group (n=523); 1972 (94%) 
patients completed the study. Peak and trough FEV1 responses were significantly 
greater with tiotropium and salmeterol than with placebo and were similar in 
both studies. With pooled data, difference versus placebo in peak FEV1 was 185 
mL (95% CI 146-223) in the tiotropium 5 μg group, 223 mL (185-262) in the 
tiotropium 2·5 μg group, and 196 mL (158-234) in the salmeterol group (all 
p<0·0001); difference in trough FEV1 was 146 mL (95% CI 105-188), 180 mL 
(138-221), and 114 mL (73-155; all p<0·0001), respectively. There were more 
ACQ-7 responders in the tiotropium 5 μg (OR 1·32, 95% CI 1·02-1·71; p=0·035) and 
2·5 μg (1·33, 1·03-1·72; p=0·031) groups, and the salmeterol group (1·46, 
1·13-1·89; p=0·0039), than in the placebo group. 48 (2%) of 2100 patients had 
serious adverse events (tiotropium 5 μg n=11, tiotropium 2·5 μg n=12, salmeterol 
n=11, placebo n=14).
INTERPRETATION: Once-daily tiotropium add-on to medium-dose inhaled 
corticosteroids reduces airflow obstruction and improves asthma control in 
patients with moderate symptomatic asthma. Patterns of response with both 
tiotropium doses were similar to those of salmeterol, and all active compounds 
had good safety and tolerability. Tiotropium is a safe and effective 
bronchodilator, and an alternative to salmeterol in this patient population.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00031-4
PMID: 25682232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Apr;99(16):e19789. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000019789.

A comparison of tiotropium/olodaterol vs tiotropium alone in terms of treatment 
effect for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A meta-analysis.

He J(1), Lin JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, China-Japan Friendship 
Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Combinations of long-acting bronchodilators with different 
mechanisms of action are recommended to improve prognosis and reduce risk of 
adverse events of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is unclear 
whether the new combination therapy with long acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) tiotropium (TIO) and long acting beta-agonists (LABA) olodaterol (OLO) 
was superior to tiotropium alone.
METHODS: We measured the efficacy of the TIO/OLO combination vsTIO alone for 
COPD patients based on electronic databases up to February 2019. After rigorous 
quality review, data was extracted from eligible trials. All the main outcomes 
were pooled analysis using RevMan software.
RESULTS: A total of 6 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were identified. The 
pooled results of our meta-analysis demonstrated that FEV1 [MD = 0.03, 95% CI 
(-0.01,0.07), P = .18], FVC [MD = -0.03, 95%CI (-0.06,0.00), P = .09] and 
FEV1%pred [MD = 0.35, 95%CI (-0.30, 0.99), P = .29] all showed no significant 
difference between the 2 groups. The overall incidence of adverse effects (AEs) 
[OR = 1.01,95%CI (0.93,1.09), P = .87] and serious AEs [OR = 1.04,95% CI (0.82, 
1.32), P = .72] in the combination group was similar to that of the TIO alone 
group, without statistical significance.
CONCLUSION: These studies reported that the TIO/OLO combination did not show 
superior effects than tiotropium alone for COPD. Additionally, both therapies 
were well tolerated.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000019789
PMID: 32311990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Arch Bronconeumol. 2020 Apr;56(4):242-248. doi: 10.1016/j.arbres.2019.11.011. 
Epub 2020 Jan 23.

The Clinical Implications of Triple Therapy in Fixed-Dose Combination in COPD: 
From the Trial to the Patient.

[Article in English, Spanish]

López-Campos JL(1), Carrasco-Hernández L(2), Román Rodríguez L(3), 
Quintana-Gallego E(2), Carmona Bernal C(3), Alcázar Navarrete B(4).

Author information:
(1)Unidad Médico-Quirúrgica de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de 
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocío/Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, España; Centro de Investigación Biomédica 
en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, España. Electronic address: lopezcampos@separ.es.
(2)Unidad Médico-Quirúrgica de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de 
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocío/Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, España; Centro de Investigación Biomédica 
en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, España.
(3)Unidad Médico-Quirúrgica de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de 
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocío/Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, España.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias 
(CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, España; Servicio de 
Neumología, Hospital de Alta Resolución de Loja, Loja, Granada, España.

The emergence of a fixed-dose combination (FDC) of a long-acting beta-agonists 
(LABAS), a long acting beta agonists agent (LAMA), and an inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) in a single inhalation device has changed the approach to 
inhaled therapy. Although clinical trials describe the efficacy and safety of 
these FDCs, their use in daily clinical practice can present challenges for the 
clinician in two specific scenarios. In patients who are already receiving 
triple therapy via different devices, switching to FDCs could confer benefits by 
reducing critical errors in the management of inhalers, improving therapeutic 
adherence, and lowering costs, while maintaining the same clinical efficacy. In 
patients who are not receiving triple therapy in different devices and who 
require a change in treatment, triple therapy FDC has shown benefits in clinical 
trials. Although methodological differences among the trials advise against 
direct comparison, clinical results show good efficacy, but also considerable 
variability, and a number of clinical outcomes have yet to be explored. In the 
future, trials must be developed to complete clinical efficacy data. Real-world 
efficacy trials are needed, and studies must be designed to determine the 
profile of patients who present a greater therapeutic response to each FDC in 
order to pave to way towards more personalized treatment.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arbres.2019.11.011
PMID: 31983474


477. Einstein (Sao Paulo). 2019 Sep 26;18:eGS4442. doi: 
10.31744/einstein_journal/2020GS4442. eCollection 2020.

Legal demands of the tiotropium bromide for treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease and their financial impact for the State of Paraná, Brazil.

Szpak R(1), Strapasson GC(2), Böger B(1), Rattmann YD(1), Gomes EC(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
(2)Centro de Medicamentos do Paraná, Secretaria da Saúde do Estado do Paraná, 
Curitiba, PR, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the legal demands of tiotropium bromide to treat chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: We included secondary data from the pharmaceutical care management 
systems made available by the Paraná State Drug Center.
RESULTS: Public interest civil action and ordinary procedures, among others, 
were the most common used by the patients to obtain the medicine. Two Health 
Centers in Paraná (Londrina and Umuarama) concentrated more than 50% of the 
actions. The most common specialty of physicians who prescribed (33.8%) was 
pulmonology. There is a small financial impact of tiotropium bromide on general 
costs with medicines of the Paraná State Drug Center. However, a significant 
individual financial impact was observed because one unit of the medicine 
represents 38% of the Brazilian minimum wage.
CONCLUSION: Our study highlights the need of incorporating this medicine in the 
class of long acting beta agonists bronchodilator in the Brazilian public 
health system.

OBJETIVO: Analisar as demandas judiciais do brometo de tiotrópio para tratar a 
doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica.
MÉTODOS: Foram considerados dados secundários dos sistemas gerenciais de 
assistência farmacêutica, disponibilizados pelo Centro de Medicamentos do 
Paraná.
RESULTADOS: Ações civis públicas e ações ordinárias, de procedimento comum, 
entre outras, foram as mais praticadas pelos pacientes para obter o medicamento. 
Duas Regionais de Saúde do Paraná (Londrina e Umuarama) concentraram mais de 50% 
das ações. Quanto à especialidade dos médicos prescritores, 33,8% eram 
pneumologistas. Verificou-se discreto impacto financeiro do brometo de tiotrópio 
nos gastos gerais com medicamentos pelo Centro de Medicamentos do Paraná. 
Entretanto, também houve relevante impacto financeiro individual, pois uma 
unidade do medicamento consome 38% do salário mínimo.
CONCLUSÃO: O estudo aponta para a necessidade de incorporação deste medicamento 
da classe broncodilatadores anticolinérgicos de longa duração, no Sistema Único 
de Saúde.

DOI: 10.31744/einstein_journal/2020GS4442
PMCID: PMC6905164
PMID: 31576910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none.


478. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2018 Jun;50:11-18. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.03.001. Epub 
2018 Mar 13.

The pharmacokinetics of three doses of budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol 
fumarate dihydrate metered dose inhaler compared with active controls: A Phase I 
randomized, single-dose, crossover study in healthy adults.

Darken P(1), DePetrillo P(2), Reisner C(3), St Rose E(4), Dorinsky P(5).

Author information:
(1)Pearl - A Member of the AstraZeneca Group, 280 Headquarters Plaza, East 
Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic address: 
Patrick.Darken@astrazeneca.com.
(2)Pharmaron, 800 W. Baltimore St., Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Electronic 
address: paolo.depetrillo@pharmaron-us.com.
(3)Pearl - A Member of the AstraZeneca Group, 280 Headquarters Plaza, East 
Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA; AstraZeneca, 1 MedImmune Way, 
Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA. Electronic address: Colin.Reisner@astrazeneca.com.
(4)Pearl - A Member of the AstraZeneca Group, 280 Headquarters Plaza, East 
Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA. Electronic address: 
earl.strose@astrazeneca.com.
(5)Pearl - A Member of the AstraZeneca Group, 4222 Emperor Boulevard, Suite 560, 
Durham, NC 27703, USA. Electronic address: paul.dorinsky1@astrazeneca.com.

The budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate dihydrate metered dose inhaler 
(BGF MDI) is an inhaled corticosteroid/long acting muscarinic 
antagonist/long-acting beta-agonist fixed-dose combination formulated with 
innovative co-suspension delivery technology that is in clinical development for 
the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This randomized, 
Phase I, single-dose, six-treatment, four-period, crossover study (NCT01980615) 
examined the pharmacokinetic (PK) and safety profile of three doses of BGF MDI 
(320/14.4/10 μg [equivalent to budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate 
320/18/9.6 μg], 160/14.4/10 μg and 80/14.4/10 μg), two doses of a 
budesonide/formoterol fumarate dihydrate fixed-dose combination (BUD/FORM MDI 
320/9 μg and 160/9 μg; not using co-suspension delivery technology) and a 
glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate dihydrate co-suspension delivery technology 
MDI (GFF MDI 14.4/10 μg) in healthy volunteers (18-45 years of age). PK 
parameters included area under the plasma concentration-time curve from 0 to 12 
h (AUC0-12), AUC up to the last measurable concentration (AUC0-t), maximum 
plasma concentration (Cmax) and time to maximum plasma concentration (tmax). 
Safety was monitored throughout the study. Of 84 subjects randomized, 76 
completed the study. BGF MDI 320/14.4/10 μg was bioequivalent to BUD/FORM MDI 
320/9 μg for budesonide for Cmax, AUC0-12 and AUC0-t (primary objective). Dose 
proportionality was observed for the budesonide component between BGF MDI 
80/14.4/10 μg and BGF MDI 160/14.4/10 μg, and between BGF MDI 160/14.4/10 μg and 
BGF MDI 320/14.4/10 μg. Systemic exposure to glycopyrronium and formoterol after 
BGF MDI 320/14.4/10 μg treatment was similar to GFF MDI 14.4/10 μg. The rate of 
adverse events was 3.7-17.9% across treatments without any serious adverse 
events. In conclusion, BGF MDI 320/14.4/10 μg had a similar budesonide PK 
profile to BUD/FORM MDI 320/9 μg. No PK drug-drug interactions were observed 
when budesonide was added to glycopyrronium and formoterol fumarate dihydrate. 
These data support the use of budesonide 320 μg and 160 μg in future clinical 
trials of BGF MDI in COPD.

Copyright © 2018 Pearl \\u0013 a member of the AstraZeneca group. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.03.001
PMID: 29544728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Oct 5;10:2109-20. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S83071. eCollection 2015.

A real-world evaluation of indacaterol and other bronchodilators in COPD: the 
INFLOW study.

Juvelekian G(1), El-Sorougi W(2), Pothirat C(3), Yunus F(4), De Guia T(5), Kuo 
HP(6), Basu Patnaik S(7), Pilipovic V(8).

Author information:
(1)St Georges Hospital University Medical Center, Ashrafieh, Beirut, Lebanon.
(2)Chest Department, Faculty of Medicine, Helwan University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai 
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(4)Department of Pulmonology and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Indonesia, Persahabatan Hospital, Jakarta Timur, Indonesia.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Philippine Heart Center, Quezon City, 
Philippines.
(6)Linkou Chang Gun Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan Hsien, Taiwan, ROC.
(7)Novartis Healthcare Pvt Ltd, Rangareddy, Telangana, India.
(8)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

AIM: INFLOW (INdacaterol eFfectiveness and utiLizatiOn in COPD: real World 
evaluation) was a prospective, noninterventional study assessing the 
effectiveness and safety of long-acting bronchodilators in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) from the Middle East, Asia, and South 
Africa.
METHODS: Patients newly prescribed or switched to indacaterol or other 
long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), or tiotropium (monotherapy or in combination) 
were evaluated over 6 months. The primary endpoint was the clinical COPD 
questionnaire overall score at the end of the study.
RESULTS: Data were analyzed from 1,710 patients (mean postbronchodilator forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second, 59% predicted) who received indacaterol 
(n=1,179), other LABA (n=68), tiotropium (n=271), indacaterol plus tiotropium 
(n=167), or other LABA plus tiotropium (n=25). Across treatments, clinical COPD 
questionnaire overall score improved from baseline by 0.81-1.26 points (all 
P<0.0001), 63%-84% of patients were satisfied/very satisfied, and physicians 
rated effectiveness as good/very good in 63%-80% of cases. The indacaterol 
inhaler was rated easy/very easy to use by the majority of patients, and 
physicians considered its use clearly understood by most patients. All 
treatments had acceptable tolerability.
CONCLUSION: In real life clinical practice across a diverse region, indacaterol 
and other long-acting bronchodilators improved health status and were well 
regarded by patients and physicians.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S83071
PMCID: PMC4599566
PMID: 26491281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2018 Dec;53:33-38. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.09.005. Epub 
2018 Sep 13.

Pharmacokinetics and safety of a single dose of the novel LAMA/LABA fixed-dose 
combination of glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate dihydrate metered dose 
inhaler, formulated using co-suspension delivery technology, in Japanese healthy 
subjects.

Reisner C(1), Miller J(2), DePetrillo P(3), Maes A(4), Siddiqui S(5), Martin 
UJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Pearl - a member of the AstraZeneca Group, 280 Headquarters Plaza, East 
Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ, 07960, USA; AstraZeneca, One MedImmune Way, 
Gaithersburg, MD, 20878, USA. Electronic address: Colin.Reisner@astrazeneca.com.
(2)Everest Clinical Research, 150 Clove Road, Suite 502, Little Falls, NJ, 
07424, USA. Electronic address: joel.miller@ecrscorp.com.
(3)Pharmaron, 800 W. Baltimore St., Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. Electronic 
address: paolo.depetrillo@pharmaron-us.com.
(4)Pearl - a member of the AstraZeneca Group, 280 Headquarters Plaza, East 
Tower, 2nd Floor, Morristown, NJ, 07960, USA. Electronic address: 
Andrea.Maes@astrazeneca.com.
(5)AstraZeneca, One MedImmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD, 20878, USA. Electronic 
address: Shahid.Siddiqui@astrazeneca.com.
(6)AstraZeneca, One MedImmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD, 20878, USA. Electronic 
address: Ubaldo.Martin@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) causes significant 
mortality in Japan. GFF MDI is a long acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting 
beta-agonist fixed-dose combination of glycopyrronium (GP) and formoterol fumarate 
dihydrate (FF), delivered by a metered dose inhaler (MDI) using co-suspension 
delivery technology, for the long-term maintenance treatment of COPD.
METHODS: This randomized, Phase I, single-dose, four-treatment, four-period, 
crossover study (NCT02196714) examined the pharmacokinetic (PK) and safety 
profile of two doses of GFF MDI (28.8 μg/10 μg and 14.4 μg/10 μg) and two doses 
of GP MDI (28.8 μg and 14.4 μg), both formulated using co-suspension delivery 
technology, in healthy Japanese subjects (18-45 years of age). PK parameters 
included area under the curve (AUC) from 0 to 12 h (AUC0-12), AUC from 0 to the 
time of the last measurable plasma concentration, maximum observed plasma 
concentration (Cmax), and time to Cmax. Safety was monitored throughout the 
study.
RESULTS: Plasma GP profiles were comparable between GFF MDI and GP MDI 
formulations containing the same GP dose. Increases in GP AUC0-12 and Cmax were 
generally dose proportional from 14.4 to 28.8 μg after administration of either 
formulation.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of FF 10 μg to GP MDI 28.8 μg or 14.4 μg in a 
fixed-dose combination did not appreciably alter the PK of GP, nor did an 
increase in GP dose from 14.4 μg to 28.8 μg in a fixed-dose combination with FF 
10 μg appreciably alter the PK of formoterol. Both formulations of GFF MDI and 
GP MDI were well tolerated in healthy Japanese subjects. Data from this study 
support further evaluation of GFF MDI in Japanese patients with COPD.

Copyright © 2018 Pearl \\u0013 a member of the AstraZeneca group. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.09.005
PMID: 30218695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Jul 16;13:2163-2172. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S158748. eCollection 2018.

Long-term safety of bilateral targeted lung denervation in patients with COPD.

Valipour A(1), Asadi S(1), Pison C(2), Jondot M(2), Kessler R(3), Benneddif 
K(3), Deslee G(4), Verdier M(4), Slebos DJ(5), Mayse M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 
Ludwig-Boltzmann-Institute for COPD and Respiratory Epidemiology, 
Otto-Wagner-Spital, Vienna, Austria, arschang.valipour@wienkav.at.
(2)CHU Grenoble Alpes, Clinique Universitaire de Pneumologie, Université 
Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.
(3)Service de Pneumologie, Nouvel Hôpital Civil, Université de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France.
(4)CHU de Reims, Hôpital Maison Blanche, Service de Pneumologie, INSERM UMRS903, 
Reims, France.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(6)Nuvaira, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Targeted lung denervation (TLD) is a novel bronchoscopic therapy for 
COPD which ablates parasympathetic pulmonary nerves running along the outside of 
the two main bronchi with the intent of inducing permanent bronchodilation. The 
goal of this study was to evaluate the feasibility and long-term safety of 
bilateral TLD during a single procedure.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This prospective, multicenter study evaluated 15 patients 
with moderate-to-severe COPD (forced expiratory volume in 1 s [FEV1] 30%-60%) 
who underwent bilateral TLD treatment following baseline assessment without 
bronchodilators. The primary safety end point was freedom from documented and 
sustained worsening of COPD directly attributable to TLD up to 1 year. Secondary 
end points included technical feasibility, change in pulmonary function tests, 
exercise capacity, and health-related quality of life. Follow-up continued up to 
3 years for subjects who reconsented for longer-term follow-up.
RESULTS: A total of 15 patients (47% male, age 63.2±4.0 years) underwent TLD 
with a total procedure time of 89±16 min, and the total fluoroscopy time was 
2.5±2.7 min. Primary safety end point of freedom from worsening of COPD was 
100%. There were no procedural complications reported. Results of lung function 
analysis and exercise capacity demonstrated similar beneficial effects of TLD 
without bronchodilators, when compared with long acting beta agonists therapy 
at 30 days, 180 days, 365 days, 2 years, and 3 years post-TLD. Five of the 12 
serious adverse events that were reported through 3 years of follow-up were 
respiratory related with no events being related to TLD therapy.
CONCLUSION: TLD delivered to both lungs in a single procedure is feasible and 
safe with few respiratory-related adverse events through 3 years.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S158748
PMCID: PMC6052931
PMID: 30038492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure AV received consultancy fees from 
Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, Novartis, Nuvaira, Inc., 
Olympus, PneumRx, PulmonX, and Uptake Medical or treated patients with the 
device developed by them. SA received none. CP treated patients with the device 
developed by Nuvaira, Inc., PneumRx, and PulmonX. MJ received none. RK received 
consultancy fees from Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Novartis, 
Nuvaira, Inc., PneumRx, and PulmonX or treated patients with the device 
developed by them. DJS received consultancy fees from Aeris Therapeutic, Boston 
Scientific, Broncus Technologies, CSA medical, Nuvaira, Inc., Olympus, Portaero, 
PulmonX, and PneumRx/BTG or treated patients with the device developed by them. 
MM is a founder and stockholder of Nuvaira, Inc. and the inventor of the device 
used in this study. KB, GD, and MV received none. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


482. Thorax. 2015 Apr;70(4):311-9. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206345. Epub 2015 Feb 
12.

Efficacy and safety of once-daily QVA149 compared with the free combination of 
once-daily tiotropium plus twice-daily formoterol in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD (QUANTIFY): a randomised, non-inferiority study.

Buhl R(1), Gessner C(2), Schuermann W(3), Foerster K(4), Sieder C(5), Hiltl 
S(5), Korn S(6).

Author information:
(1)III.Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik, Universitätsmedizin der Johannes 
Gutenberg-Universität Mainz K.d.ö.R., Mainz, Germany.
(2)Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany POIS Leipzig GbR, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(3)Pneumologische Praxis, Marburg, Germany.
(4)Kardio-Pneumologische Praxis, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nürnberg, Germany.
(6)Universitätsmedizin der Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND: QVA149 is a once-daily (o.d.) inhaled dual bronchodilator containing 
a fixed-dose combination of the long-acting beta-agonist indacaterol and the 
long acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium for the treatment of COPD. The 
QUANTIFY study compared QVA149 with a free-dose bronchodilator combination of 
tiotropium plus formoterol (TIO+FOR) in improving health-related quality of life 
(HRQoL) of patients with COPD.
METHODS: This multicentre, blinded, triple-dummy, parallel-group, 
non-inferiority study randomised patients aged ≥40 years with moderate-to-severe 
COPD (post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) ≥30% to <80% 
predicted) to QVA149 110/50 µg o.d. or TIO 18 µg o.d.+ FOR 12 µg twice daily 
(1:1) for 26 weeks. The primary endpoint was to demonstrate non-inferiority in 
HRQoL assessed using St George's Respiratory Questionnaire-COPD (SGRQ-C). The 
prespecified non-inferiority margin was 4 units. Secondary endpoints included 
Transition Dyspnoea Index (TDI) score, pre-dose FEV1, forced vital capacity 
(FVC) and safety.
RESULTS: Of the 934 patients randomised (QVA149=476 and TIO+FOR=458), 87.9% 
completed the study. At week 26, non-inferiority was met for SGRQ-C (QVA149 vs 
TIO+FOR; difference: -0.69 units; 95% CI -2.31 to 0.92; p=0.399). A 
significantly higher percentage of patients achieved a clinically relevant ≥1 
point improvement in TDI total score with QVA149 (49.6%) versus TIO+FOR (42.4%; 
p=0.033). QVA149 significantly increased pre-dose FEV1 (+68 mL, 95% CI 37 mL to 
100 mL; p<0.001) and FVC (+74 mL, 95% CI 24 mL to 125 mL; p=0.004) compared with 
TIO+FOR at week 26. The incidence of adverse events was comparable between both 
treatments (QVA149=43.7% and TIO+FOR=42.6%).
CONCLUSIONS: QVA149 is non-inferior to TIO+FOR in improving HRQoL, with 
clinically meaningful and significant improvements in breathlessness and lung 
function in patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01120717.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206345
PMCID: PMC4392202
PMID: 25677679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Oct 22;(10):CD008989. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub3.

Long-acting beta2-agonist in addition to tiotropium versus either tiotropium or 
long-acting beta2-agonist alone for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Farne HA(1), Cates CJ.

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(4):CD008989.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting bronchodilators, comprising long-acting beta2-agonists 
(LABA) and long-acting anti-muscarinic agents (LAMA, principally tiotropium), 
are commonly used for managing persistent symptoms of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Combining these treatments, which have different 
mechanisms of action, may be more effective than the individual components. 
However, the benefits and risks of combining tiotropium and LABAs for the 
treatment of COPD are unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the relative effects on markers of quality of life, 
exacerbations, symptoms, lung function and serious adverse events in people with 
COPD randomised to LABA plus tiotropium versus tiotropium alone; or LABA plus 
tiotropium versus LABA alone.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register of 
trials and ClinicalTrials.gov up to July 2015.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group, randomised controlled trials of 
three months or longer comparing treatment with tiotropium in addition to LABA 
against tiotropium or LABA alone for people with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed trials 
for inclusion and then extracted data on trial quality and the outcome results. 
We contacted study authors for additional information. We collected information 
on adverse effects from the trials.
MAIN RESULTS: This review included 10 trials on 10,894 participants, mostly 
recruiting participants with moderate or severe COPD. All of the trials compared 
tiotropium in addition to LABA to tiotropium alone, and four trials additionally 
compared LAMA plus LABA with LABA alone. Four studies used the LABA olodaterol, 
three used indacaterol, two used formoterol, and one used salmeterol.Compared to 
tiotropium alone, treatment with tiotropium plus LABA resulted in a slightly 
larger improvement in mean health-related quality of life (St George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) (mean difference (MD) -1.34, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) -1.87 to -0.80; 6709 participants; 5 studies). The MD was smaller 
than the four units that is considered clinically important, but a responder 
analysis indicated that 7% more participants receiving tiotropium plus LABA had 
a noticeable benefit (greater than four units) from treatment in comparison to 
tiotropium alone. In the control arm in one study, which was tiotropium alone, 
the SGRQ improved by falling 4.5 units from baseline and with tiotropium plus 
LABA the improvement was a fall of a further 1.3 units (on average). Most of the 
data came from studies using olodaterol. High withdrawal rates in the trials 
increased the uncertainty in this result, and the GRADE assessment for this 
outcome was therefore moderate. There were no significant differences in the 
other primary outcomes (hospital admission or mortality).The secondary outcome 
of pre-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) showed a 
small mean increase with the addition of LABA over the control arm (MD 0.06, 95% 
CI 0.05 to 0.07; 9573 participants; 10 studies), which showed a change from 
baseline ranging from 0.03 L to 0.13 L with tiotropium alone. None of the other 
secondary outcomes (exacerbations, symptom scores, serious adverse events, and 
withdrawals) showed any statistically significant differences between the 
groups. There was moderate heterogeneity for both exacerbations and 
withdrawals.This review included data on four LABAs: two administered twice 
daily (salmeterol, formoterol) and two once daily (indacaterol, olodaterol). The 
results were largely from studies of olodaterol and there was insufficient 
information to assess whether the other LABAs were equivalent to olodaterol or 
each other.Comparing LABA plus tiotropium treatment with LABA alone, there was a 
small but significant improvement in SGRQ (MD -1.25, 95% CI -2.14 to -0.37; 3378 
participants; 4 studies). The data came mostly from studies using olodaterol 
and, although the difference was smaller than four units, this still represented 
an increase of 10 people with a clinically important improvement for 100 
treated. There was also an improvement in FEV1 (MD 0.07, 95% CI 0.06 to 0.09; 
3513 participants; 4 studies), and in addition an improvement in exacerbation 
rates (odds ratio (OR) 0.80, 95% CI 0.69 to 0.93; 3514 participants; 3 studies).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The results from this review indicated a small mean 
improvement in health-related quality of life and FEV1 for participants on a 
combination of tiotropium and LABA compared to either agent alone, and this 
translated into a small increase in the number of responders on combination 
treatment. In addition, adding tiotropium to LABA reduced exacerbations, 
although adding LABA to tiotropium did not. Hospital admission and mortality 
were not altered by adding LABA to tiotropium, although there may not be enough 
data. While it is possible that this is affected by higher attrition in the 
tiotropium group, one would expect that participants withdrawn from the study 
would have had less favourable outcomes; this means that the expected direction 
of attrition bias would be to reduce the estimated benefit of the combination 
treatment. The results were largely from studies of olodaterol and there was 
insufficient information to assess whether the other LABAs were equivalent to 
olodaterol or each other.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008989.pub3
PMID: 26490945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Chest. 2018 Jun;153(6):1315-1325. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.01.008. Epub 2018 
Jan 31.

β-Blockers in COPD: A Cohort Study From the TONADO Research Program.

Maltais F(1), Buhl R(2), Koch A(3), Amatto VC(4), Reid J(5), Grönke L(4), 
Bothner U(4), Voß F(6), McGarvey L(7), Ferguson GT(8).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie 
de Québec, Quebec City, QC, Canada. Electronic address: 
Francois.Maltais@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(2)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik V, Klinikum der 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, and the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Klinikum der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany.
(5)Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(6)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(7)Centre for Infection and Immunity, School of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland.
(8)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI.

Comment in
    Chest. 2018 Jun;153(6):1289-1291.

BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular disease is a frequent comorbidity in patients with 
COPD. Many physicians, particularly pulmonologists, are reluctant to use 
β-adrenoceptor blocking agents (β-blockers) in patients with COPD, despite their 
proven effectiveness in preventing cardiovascular events.
METHODS: The large (5,162 patients) phase III TONADO 1 and 2 studies assessed 
lung function and patient-reported outcomes in patients with moderate to very 
severe COPD receiving long-acting bronchodilator treatment across 1 year. This 
post hoc analysis characterized lung-function changes, patient-reported 
outcomes, and safety in the subgroup of patients receiving β-blockers in the 
studies.
RESULTS: In total, 557 of 5,162 patients (11%) received β-blockers at baseline. 
Postbronchodilator FEV1 at baseline was higher in the β-blocker group (1.470 L) 
compared with that in the no β-blocker group (1.362 L). As expected, patients 
receiving β-blockers had a more frequent history of cardiovascular comorbidities 
and medications. Lung function improved from baseline in patients with or those 
without β-blocker treatment, and no relevant between-group differences were 
observed in trough FEV1 or trough FVC at 24 or 52 weeks. No relevant differences 
were observed for St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire results and Transition 
Dyspnea Index in patients with β-blockers compared with those in patients 
without. Safety findings were comparable between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Lung function, overall respiratory status, and safety of 
tiotropium/olodaterol were not influenced by baseline β-blocker treatment in 
patients with moderate to very severe COPD. Results from this large patient 
cohort support the cautious and appropriate use of β-blockers in patients with 
COPD and cardiovascular comorbidity.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: NCT01431274 and No. NCT01431287; URL: 
www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.01.008
PMID: 29355547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2016 Dec;41(6):723-731. doi: 
10.1007/s13318-015-0300-7.

Pharmacokinetics of Glycopyrronium Following Repeated Once-Daily Inhalation in 
Healthy Chinese Subjects.

Sechaud R(1), Machineni S(2), Tillmann HC(3), Hara H(4), Tan X(5), Zhao R(6), 
Ren S(6), Hou J(7).

Author information:
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, WSJ-386-12.48.13, Novartis 
Campus, 4002, Basel, Switzerland. romain.sechaud@novartis.com.
(2)Novartis Healthcare Pvt. Ltd, Hyderabad, India.
(3)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, WSJ-386-12.48.13, Novartis 
Campus, 4002, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, WSJ-153.3.02.2, Novartis Campus, 
4002, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China.
(6)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Shanghai, People's Republic of 
China.
(7)TICH, TEDA, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Glycopyrronium is a once-daily long acting muscarinic 
antagonist for the maintenance treatment of patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. This study assessed the pharmacokinetics of inhaled 
glycopyrronium 50 µg once-daily for 14 days in healthy Chinese subjects.
METHODS: In this open-label study, 12 Chinese healthy subjects (six males and 
six females; mean age 23.1 years [range 18-26 years]) were enrolled and 
completed the study. Glycopyrronium in plasma was determined using validated 
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry method with a lower limit of 
quantification of 1.5 pg/mL. Plasma pharmacokinetic parameters were determined 
on Day 1 after first dose and on Day 14 (steady state) after last dose using 
non-compartmental analysis. Trough pharmacokinetic samples (Days 5, 7, 10 and 
12) were collected. Safety was also assessed.
RESULTS: Glycopyrronium was rapidly absorbed into the systemic circulation after 
inhalation and its plasma concentrations decreased rapidly thereafter. Median 
time to reach maximum concentration (T max) was reached within 5 min after 
inhalation on both Days 1 and 14. Accumulation in the systemic exposure to 
glycopyrronium was observed from the time of first dose administration on Day 1 
up to Day 14 and the observed accumulation ratio (R acc) values of area under 
the plasma drug concentration-time curve [AUC] from time 0 to 24 h post-dose 
(AUC0-24h) and maximum plasma drug concentration (C max) (Day 14/Day 1) were 
2.77 and 1.59, respectively. The elimination half-life (T 1/2) was not reported. 
Mean effective half-life (T 1/2,acc) was 37.7 h. Pharmacokinetic steady state 
was reached after 5 days of daily dosing. One subject experienced dry mouth; 
otherwise glycopyrronium was well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparison of systemic exposure to glycopyrronium in Chinese versus 
the non-Chinese population did not indicate clinically relevant ethnic 
differences. Multiple inhaled doses of glycopyrronium were safe and well 
tolerated.

DOI: 10.1007/s13318-015-0300-7
PMID: 26428357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2017 Feb;42:25-32. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.12.003. Epub 
2016 Dec 28.

Pharmacokinetics of tiotropium administered by Respimat(®) in asthma patients: 
Analysis of pooled data from Phase II and III clinical trials.

Sharma A(1), Kerstjens HA(2), Aalbers R(3), Moroni-Zentgraf P(4), Weber B(5), 
Dahl R(6).

Author information:
(1)Translational Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma 
GmbH & Co. KG, Birkendorfer Strasse 65, Biberach 88400, Germany. Electronic 
address: Ashish.Sharma@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(2)University of Groningen, Department of Pulmonology, and Groningen Research 
Institute for Asthma and COPD (GRIAC), University Medical Center Groningen, P.O. 
Box 30.001, 9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Martini Hospital, Groningen, 9700 RM, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Binger Strasse 173, Ingelheim 
55216, Germany.
(5)Translational Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma 
GmbH & Co. KG, Birkendorfer Strasse 65, Biberach 88400, Germany.
(6)Department of Clinical Medicine - Department of Respiratory Diseases and 
Allergy, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

Tiotropium is a long-acting inhaled antimuscarinic bronchodilator that has 
recently received marketing authorization for the indication of asthma with dose 
delivery via the Respimat® inhaler, in addition to its widely established role 
in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This report 
presents a combined analysis of tiotropium plasma and urine pharmacokinetics at 
steady state from 8 Phase II/III clinical trials in asthma and delineates the 
effects of patient characteristics on systemic exposure based on the parameters 
fe0-24,ss (fraction of dose excreted unchanged in urine over 24 h post-dose at 
steady-state) and dose-normalized AUCtau,ss and Cmax,ss. Pharmacokinetics were 
also compared between asthma and COPD, incorporating data from 3 COPD Phase 
II/III clinical trials. Tiotropium pharmacokinetics in asthma were 
dose-proportional up to 5 μg dosed once daily. The following factors showed no 
statistically significant effects on tiotropium systemic exposure in asthma 
based on analysis of geometric mean ratios and 90% confidence intervals: age, 
asthma severity, lung function, reversibility testing, allergy status, smoking 
history, geographical region, and posology (5 μg once daily or 2.5 μg twice 
daily via Respimat®). Asian patients showed a moderately but significantly 
higher systemic exposure compared to White or Black patients. However, no 
differences in safety by race were observed. Total systemic exposure (AUCtau,ss) 
was similar between asthma and COPD, but Cmax,ss was 52% lower in asthma 
patients compared to COPD. It is concluded that in asthma, patient 
characteristics have no relevant effect on tiotropium systemic exposure. Since 
systemic exposure to inhaled drugs is an indicator of safety, the lower Cmax,ss 
compared to COPD is not considered a concern for tiotropium therapy of asthma.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2016.12.003
PMID: 28039077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2018 Apr 30;6(3):e00400. doi: 10.1002/prp2.400. 
eCollection 2018 Jun.

Pharmacological properties of revefenacin (TD-4208), a novel, nebulized 
long-acting, and lung selective muscarinic antagonist, at human recombinant 
muscarinic receptors and in rat, guinea pig, and human isolated airway tissues.

Hegde SS(1), Pulido-Rios MT(1), Luttmann MA(2), Foley JJ(2), Hunsberger GE(2), 
Steinfeld T(1), Lee T(1), Ji Y(1), Mammen MM(1), Jasper JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Theravance Biopharma U.S, Inc South San Francisco CA USA.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals King of Prussia PA USA.

Revefenacin (TD-4208) is a novel, long-acting, and lung-selective muscarinic 
cholinergic receptor (mAChR) antagonist in development as a nebulized inhalation 
solution for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
patients. This study evaluated the pharmacology of revefenacin at human 
recombinant mAChRs and in airway tissues from rats, guinea pigs, and humans. At 
human recombinant mAChRs, revefenacin displayed high affinity (pKI = 8.2-9.8) 
and behaved as a competitive antagonist (pKI, apparent = 9.4-10.9) at the five 
human recombinant mAChRs. Kinetic studies demonstrated that revefenacin 
dissociated significantly slower from the hM3 (t1/2 = 82 minutes) compared to 
the hM 2 (t1/2 = 6.9 minutes) mAChR at 37°C, thereby making it kinetically 
selective for the former subtype. Similarly, in functional studies, 
revefenacin-mediated antagonism of acetylcholine (ACh)-evoked calcium 
mobilization responses were reversed less rapidly at hM3 compared to the hM2 
mAChR. In isolated tracheal tissues from rat and guinea pig and isolated 
bronchial tissues from humans, revefenacin potently antagonized mAChR-mediated 
contractile responses. Furthermore, the antagonistic effects of revefenacin in 
rat, guinea pig, and human airway tissues were slowly reversible (t1/2 of 13.3, 
>16, and >10 hours, respectively). These data demonstrate that revefenacin is a 
potent, high affinity, and selective functional mAChR antagonist with kinetic 
selectivity for the hM3 receptor and produces potent and long-lasting antagonism 
of mAChR-mediated contractile responses in rat, guinea pig, and human airway 
tissue. These data suggest that revefenacin has the potential to be a potent 
once-daily dosed inhaled bronchodilator in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1002/prp2.400
PMCID: PMC5927803
PMID: 29736245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Eur J Pharmacol. 2017 Oct 5;812:147-154. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2017.07.026. Epub 
2017 Jul 14.

Pharmacological characterization of the interaction between umeclidinium and 
vilanterol in human bronchi.

Calzetta L(1), Rogliani P(2), Facciolo F(3), Rendina E(4), Cazzola M(2), Matera 
MG(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. 
Electronic address: luigino.calzetta@uniroma2.it.
(2)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(3)Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Thoracic Surgery Unit, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, 
Naples, Italy.

The long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) / long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
fixed dose combination (FDC) therapy represents the cornerstone for the 
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Nevertheless, 
conflicting clinical findings still exist on the real benefit of the LABA/LAMA 
FDCs. Therefore, we investigated whether combining the LABA vilanterol with the 
LAMA umeclidinium may induce synergistic bronchorelaxant effect in isolated 
airways. The effect of umeclidinium and vilanterol, administered alone, in 
combination at the ratio of concentrations reproducing the doses delivered by 
Anoro® Ellipta® (55:22), or at isoeffective low concentrations, was investigated 
on the cholinergic contractile tone induced by the parasympathetic activation of 
human isolated airways. The interaction was analyzed by using the Bliss 
Independence and Unified Theory models. Umeclidinium and vilanterol induced a 
concentration-dependent relaxation of isolated bronchi, with umeclidinium 
significantly (P < 0.05) more potent than vilanterol (Emax at 10Hz: umeclidium 
102.6 ± 6.8%, vilanterol 75.1 ± 13.8%; pEC50 at 10Hz: umeclidinium 8.6 ± 0.4, 
vilanterol 6.9 ± 0.6). When administered at 55:22 concentration-ratio, 
umeclidinium plus vilanterol completely relaxed the isolated airways (Emax at 
10Hz: 99.6 ± 8.0%; pEC50 at 10Hz: 8.2 ± 0.4). No synergistic interaction was 
detected for umeclidinium/vilanterol combined at 55:22 ratio, whereas strong 
synergism was elicited when the drugs were administered at low isoeffective 
concentrations (+ 41.4 ± 5.8% vs. monocomponents), leading to submaximal 
relaxant effect (81.4 ± 5.8%). Umeclidinium and vilanterol are imbalanced when 
combined at 55:22 ratio, with umeclidinium over-dosed, or vice versa vilanterol 
under-dosed. Specific studies are needed to identify the dose ratio of 
umeclidinium/vilanterol combination to guarantee equipotency concentrations of 
each component into the lung, and induce synergistic bronchodilation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2017.07.026
PMID: 28716723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Jun;56:39-50. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.03.004. Epub 
2019 Mar 12.

Pharmacological characterization of the interaction between tiotropium bromide 
and olodaterol on human bronchi and small airways.

Calzetta L(1), Rogliani P(2), Page C(3), Rinaldi B(4), Cazzola M(2), Matera 
MG(4).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
luigino.calzetta@uniroma2.it.
(2)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(3)Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Science, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.

Combining a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) with a long acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) is the cornerstone to treat patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). In this study we have characterized the interaction 
between the LAMA tiotropium bromide, and the LABA olodaterol, on the contractile 
tone of human medium bronchi and small airways. The response to a combination of 
tiotropium bromide and olodaterol was assessed at sub-maximal contractile tone 
induced by carbachol. The duration of action was studied in tissue contracted by 
transmural stimulation. Relaxation of bronchial tone was expressed as % of 
maximal response to papaverine. Drug interactions were analyzed by the Bliss 
Independence method and Unified Theory. Tiotropium bromide/olodaterol 
combination induced a significant synergistic relaxant response (P < 0.05 vs. 
expected additive effect) in medium bronchi and small airways pre-contracted by 
carbachol, by enhancing relaxation +22.13 ± 4.42% and +26.31 ± 12.39%, 
respectively. The combination of tiotropium bromide and olodaterol also reduced 
the airway smooth muscle contractility elicited by transmural stimulation by 
73.60 ± 3.10%. The extent of synergy was strong to very strong, and was 
supported by the release of neuronal acetylcholine, cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate levels, and activation of iberiotoxin-sensitive KCa++ channels. 
Conversely, the interaction between tiotropium bromide and olodaterl was 
independent of the activity at M2 muscarinic receptors. These results indicate 
that tiotropium bromide/olodaterol combination leads to a potent and durable 
synergistic relaxation of human medium bronchi and small airways. Further 
pharmacological studies are needed to confirm these results in clinical 
settings.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.03.004
PMID: 30876907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2018 Jul;24(7):700-709. doi: 
10.18553/jmcp.2018.24.7.700.

The Effect of FDA Drug Safety Communications on Patterns of Tiotropium 
Dispensing: A U.S. Health Plan Claims Database Study.

Major JM(1), Zhou EH(1), Ding Y(1), Ly T(2), Li J(1), Pinheiro SP(1), Seymour 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology, Center for Drug Evaluation and 
Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(2)2 Office of Biostatistics, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: The FDA issued 2 main drug safety communications (DSCs) on the 
cardiovascular safety of tiotropium in March 2008 (warning of a potential 
increased stroke risk) and January 2010 (informing of an absence of a 
significant increased stroke risk or cardiovascular events based on findings 
from a large trial).
OBJECTIVE: To describe the effect of the FDA DSCs on medication dispensing of 
tiotropium in a large U.S. claims database.
METHODS: Initiation of tiotropium products among patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) aged 40 years and older was determined 
monthly from 2006-2012 using medication dispensing from the IMS Lifelink Health 
Plan Claims Database. Similarly, monthly initiation of products containing 
long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) was calculated to explore product switching. 
The effect of the 2008 and 2010 FDA DSCs was measured using interrupted 
time-series analysis. Subgroups of patients with greater cardiovascular risk 
were also examined.
RESULTS: A decreasing trend in initiation of tiotropium-containing products was 
present before the initial 2008 DSC. The decline in tiotropium initiation 
continued until January 2010, accompanied by an increased initiation of 
LABA-containing products in patients with COPD. In the presence of the existing 
decreasing trend, the initial DSC was followed by an immediate 2.8% (P = 0.02) 
further reduction in tiotropium initiation. Tiotropium initiation increased 2.5% 
(P = 0.03) immediately after the 2010 DSC, reducing the overall decline in rate 
and stabilizing (flattening) the trend. No significant changes in dispensing 
level or trend were observed among COPD patients with cardiovascular 
comorbidity.
CONCLUSIONS: Cardiovascular safety concerns may have affected tiotropium 
initiation as indicated by the decrease in tiotropium dispensing shown 
immediately following the initial DSC. The effect was alleviated as concerns 
lessened following the most recent DSC.
DISCLOSURES: This research did not receive any specific grant from funding 
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors are 
employed by the FDA and have no conflict of interest relevant to the content of 
this study. The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the views of 
the FDA.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2018.24.7.700
PMID: 29952703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Aug 15;287(1):9-16. doi: 
10.1016/j.taap.2015.05.012. Epub 2015 May 27.

Comparing the cardiovascular therapeutic indices of glycopyrronium and 
tiotropium in an integrated rat pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic and safety 
model.

Trifilieff A(1), Ethell BT(1), Sykes DA(2), Watson KJ(1), Collingwood S(1), 
Charlton SJ(2), Kent TC(3).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Disease Area, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 
Wimblehurst Road, Horsham, West Sussex RH12 5AB, United Kingdom.
(2)Respiratory Disease Area, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 
Wimblehurst Road, Horsham, West Sussex RH12 5AB, United Kingdom; School of Life 
Sciences, Queen's Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Respiratory Disease Area, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 
Wimblehurst Road, Horsham, West Sussex RH12 5AB, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: tobykent@me.com.

Long acting inhaled muscarinic receptor antagonists, such as tiotropium, are 
widely used as bronchodilator therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Although this class of compounds is generally considered to be safe and 
well tolerated in COPD patients the cardiovascular safety of tiotropium has 
recently been questioned. We describe a rat in vivo model that allows the 
concurrent assessment of muscarinic antagonist potency, bronchodilator efficacy 
and a potential for side effects, and we use this model to compare tiotropium 
with NVA237 (glycopyrronium bromide), a recently approved inhaled muscarinic 
antagonist for COPD. Anaesthetized Brown Norway rats were dosed intratracheally 
at 1 or 6h prior to receiving increasing doses of intravenous methacholine. 
Changes in airway resistance and cardiovascular function were recorded and 
therapeutic indices were calculated against the ED50 values for the inhibition 
of methacholine-induced bronchoconstriction. At both time points studied, 
greater therapeutic indices for hypotension and bradycardia were observed with 
glycopyrronium (19.5 and 28.5 fold at 1h; >200 fold at 6h) than with tiotropium 
(1.5 and 4.2 fold at 1h; 4.6 and 5.5 fold at 6h). Pharmacokinetic, protein 
plasma binding and rat muscarinic receptor binding properties for both compounds 
were determined and used to generate an integrated model of systemic M2 
muscarinic receptor occupancy, which predicted significantly higher M2 receptor 
blockade at ED50 doses with tiotropium than with glycopyrronium. In our 
preclinical model there was an improved safety profile for glycopyrronium when 
compared with tiotropium.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.05.012
PMID: 26026369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Oct 8;14:2305-2318. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S203709. eCollection 2019.

Pharmacokinetics and safety of revefenacin in subjects with impaired renal or 
hepatic function.

Borin MT(1), Lo A(2), Barnes CN(3), Pendyala S(4), Bourdet DL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Translational Pharmacology, Theravance Biopharma 
US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Theravance Biopharma US, 
Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical Development, Inflammation and Immunology, Theravance 
Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.

PURPOSE: Revefenacin, a long acting muscarinic antagonist for nebulization, has 
been shown to improve lung function in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. Here we report pharmacokinetic (PK) and safety results from 
two multicenter, open-label, single-dose trials evaluating revefenacin in 
subjects with severe renal impairment (NCT02578082) and moderate hepatic 
impairment (NCT02581592).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The renal impairment trial enrolled subjects with normal 
renal function and severe renal impairment (estimated glomerular filtration rate 
<30 mL/min/1.73 m2). The hepatic impairment trial enrolled subjects with normal 
hepatic function and moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class B). Subjects 
received a single 175-µg dose of revefenacin through nebulization. PK plasma 
samples and urine collections were obtained at multiple time points for 5 days 
following treatment; all subjects were monitored for adverse events.
RESULTS: In the renal impairment study, the maximum observed plasma revefenacin 
concentration (Cmax) was up to 2.3-fold higher and area under the 
concentration-time curve from time 0 to infinity (AUCinf) was up to 2.4-fold 
higher in subjects with severe renal impairment compared with those with normal 
renal function. For THRX-195518, the major metabolite of revefenacin, the 
corresponding changes in Cmax and AUCinf were 1.8- and 2.7-fold higher, 
respectively. In the hepatic impairment study, revefenacin Cmax and AUCinf were 
1.03- and 1.18-fold higher, respectively, in subjects with moderate hepatic 
impairment compared with those with normal hepatic function. The corresponding 
changes in THRX-195518 Cmax and AUCinf were 1.5- and 2.8-fold higher, 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Systemic exposure to revefenacin increased modestly in subjects with 
severe renal impairment but was similar between subjects with moderate hepatic 
impairment and normal hepatic function. The increase in plasma exposure to 
THRX-195518 in subjects with severe renal or moderate hepatic impairment is 
unlikely to be of clinical consequence given its low antimuscarinic potency, low 
systemic levels after inhaled revefenacin administration, and favorable safety 
profile.

© 2019 Borin et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S203709
PMCID: PMC6790214
PMID: 31632000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MTB is a consultant for Theravance Biopharma US, 
Inc. AL and DLB are employees of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. CNB and SP were 
employees of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. at the time this study was conducted. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


493. Respir Med. 2016 Sep;118:102-111. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.07.001. Epub 2016 Jul 
2.

Safety and tolerability of once-daily tiotropium Respimat(®) as add-on to at 
least inhaled corticosteroids in adult patients with symptomatic asthma: A 
pooled safety analysis.

Dahl R(1), Engel M(2), Dusser D(3), Halpin D(4), Kerstjens HAM(5), 
Zaremba-Pechmann L(6), Moroni-Zentgraf P(7), Busse WW(8), Bateman ED(9).

Author information:
(1)Odense University Hospital, University of Southern Denmark, Sdr Boulevard, DK 
5000, Odense C, Denmark. Electronic address: ronald.dahl2@rsyd.dk.
(2)TA Respiratory Diseases, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Binger 
Str. 173, 55216, Ingelheim, Germany.
(3)Pulmonary Department and Adult Cystic Fibrosis Center, Paris Descartes 
University, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Cochin Hospital, 27 Rue du Fg St Jacques, 
75014, Paris, France.
(4)Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Barrack Rd, Exeter, Devon, EX2 5DW, UK.
(5)University of Groningen, Department of Pulmonary Medicine, and Groningen 
Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Postbox 30.001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Global Biometrics and Data Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. 
KG, Birkendorferstrasse 65, 88397, Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
(7)TA Respiratory Diseases, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Binger 
Str. 173, 55216, Ingelheim, Germany; Boehringer Ingelheim Pty Limited, Level 1, 
78 Waterloo Rd, North Ryde, NSW 2113, Australia.
(8)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, 600 Highland 
Ave, Madison, WI 53792, Wisconsin, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Mowbray, 7700, Cape Town, 
South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium, a long acting beta agonists bronchodilator, has 
demonstrated efficacy and safety as add-on therapy to inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS), with or without other maintenance therapies, in patients with symptomatic 
asthma.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate safety and tolerability of tiotropium delivered via the 
Respimat(®) device, compared with placebo, each as add-on to at least ICS 
therapy, in a pooled sample of adults with symptomatic asthma at different 
treatment steps.
METHODS: Data were pooled from seven Phase II and III, randomised, double-blind, 
parallel-group trials of 12-52 weeks' treatment duration, which investigated 
once-daily tiotropium Respimat(®) (5 μg, 2.5 μg) versus placebo as add-on to 
different background maintenance therapy including at least ICS. Adverse events 
(AEs) including serious AEs were assessed throughout treatment + 30 days after 
the last dose of trial medication.
RESULTS: Of 3474 patients analysed, 2157 received tiotropium. The percentage of 
patients with AEs was comparable between treatment groups: tiotropium 5 μg, 
60.8%; placebo 5 μg pool, 62.5%; tiotropium 2.5 μg, 57.1%; placebo 2.5 μg pool, 
55.1%. Consistent with the disease profile, the most frequent AEs overall were 
asthma, decreased peak expiratory flow rate (both less frequent with tiotropium) 
and nasopharyngitis. Overall incidence of dry mouth, commonly associated with 
use of anticholinergics, was low: tiotropium 5 μg, 1.0%; placebo 5 μg pool, 
0.5%; tiotropium 2.5 μg, 0.4%; placebo 2.5 μg pool, 0.5%. The percentage of 
cardiac disorder AEs was comparable between tiotropium and placebo: tiotropium 
5 μg, 1.4%; placebo 5 μg pool, 1.4%; tiotropium 2.5 μg, 1.4%; placebo 2.5 μg 
pool, 1.1%. The proportions of patients with serious AEs were balanced across 
groups: tiotropium 5 μg, 4.0%; placebo 5 μg pool, 4.9%; tiotropium 2.5 μg, 2.0%; 
placebo 2.5 μg pool, 3.3%.
CONCLUSION: Tiotropium Respimat(®) demonstrated safety and tolerability 
comparable with those of placebo, as add-on to at least ICS therapy, at 
different treatment steps in adults with symptomatic asthma.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.07.001
PMID: 27578478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Allergol Int. 2018 Oct;67(4):460-466. doi: 10.1016/j.alit.2018.02.008. Epub 2018 
Mar 28.

Possible involvement of acetylcholine-mediated inflammation in airway diseases.

Koarai A(1), Ichinose M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan. Electronic address: 
ichinose@rm.med.tohoku.ac.jp.

Inhaled bronchodilator treatment with a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
reduces symptoms and the risk of exacerbations in COPD and asthma. However, 
increasing evidence from cell culture and animal studies suggests that 
anti-muscarinic drugs could also possess anti-inflammatory effects. Recent 
studies have revealed that acetylcholine (ACh) can be synthesized and released 
from both neuronal and non-neuronal cells, and the released ACh can potentiate 
airway inflammation and remodeling in airway diseases. However, these 
anti-inflammatory effects of anti-muscarinic drugs have not yet been confirmed 
in COPD and asthma patients. This review will focus on recent findings about the 
possible involvement of ACh in airway inflammation and remodeling, and the 
anti-inflammatory effect of anti-muscarinic drugs in airway diseases. Clarifying 
the acetylcholine-mediated inflammation could provide insights into the 
mechanisms of airway diseases, which could lead to future therapeutic strategies 
for inhibiting the disease progression and exacerbations.

Copyright © 2018 Japanese Society of Allergology. Production and hosting by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.alit.2018.02.008
PMID: 29605098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Apr 15;25(8):1736-1741. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.02.065. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Discovery of novel quaternary ammonium derivatives of (3R)-quinuclidinyl amides 
as potent and long acting muscarinic antagonists.

Prat M(1), Buil MA(2), Fernández MD(3), Tort L(2), Monleón JM(2), Casals G(2), 
Ferrer M(2), Castro J(2), Gavaldà A(2), Miralpeix M(2), Ramos I(2), Vilella 
D(2), Huerta JM(2), Espinosa S(2), Hernández B(2), Segarra V(2), Córdoba M(2).

Author information:
(1)Almirall, R&D Centre, Laureà Miró 408-410, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, 08980 
Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: maria.prat@almirall.com.
(2)Almirall, R&D Centre, Laureà Miró 408-410, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, 08980 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Thomson Reuters, Provenza 398, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Novel quaternary ammonium derivatives of (3R)-quinuclidinyl amides have been 
identified as potent M3 muscarinic antagonists with a long duration of action in 
an in vivo model of bronchoconstriction. The synthesis, structure-activity 
relationships and biological evaluation of this series of compounds are 
reported.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.02.065
PMID: 25800115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2017 Apr;42(2):269-279. doi: 
10.1007/s13318-016-0345-2.

A Two-Period Open-Label, Single-Dose Crossover Study in Healthy Volunteers to 
Evaluate the Drug-Drug Interaction Between Cimetidine and Inhaled Extrafine CHF 
5993.

Mariotti F(1), Ciurlia G(2), Spaccapelo L(2), Muraro A(2), Acerbi D(2).

Author information:
(1)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Largo Belloli 11/A, 
43122, Parma, Italy. F.Mariotti@chiesi.com.
(2)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Largo Belloli 11/A, 
43122, Parma, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: CHF 5993 is an extrafine 'triple therapy' combination 
of the long acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium bromide (GB), the 
long-acting beta-agonist formoterol fumarate (FF), and the inhaled corticosteroid 
beclometasone dipropionate (BDP). It is in development for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease and asthma delivered via pressurised metered-dose inhaler.
METHODS: This two-period, open-label, crossover study examined the drug-drug 
interaction of CHF 5993 and cimetidine. In one period, subjects received 
cimetidine 800 mg twice daily for 6 days; on the fourth day they also received 
CHF 5993 (BDP/FF/GB 400/24/100 µg). In the other, they received CHF 5993 alone. 
Primary objective was to compare the area under the plasma concentration-time 
curve from time 0 to last quantifiable concentration (AUC0-t) of GB, with and 
without cimetidine. Secondary endpoints included GB AUC0-12h, maximum 
concentration (C max), time to C max (t max), elimination half-life (t ½) and 
urinary excretion. Pharmacokinetic parameters of BDP, 
beclometasone-17-monopropionate (B17MP; active metabolite of BDP) and formoterol 
were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Twenty-six subjects were randomised; 25 completed. Co-administration of 
CHF 5993 and cimetidine resulted in small, statistically significant increases 
in GB AUC0-t, AUC0-12h and C max vs CHF 5993 (ratios 1.16, 1.21 and 1.26, 
respectively); t ½, t max and urinary excretion were unaffected. There were 
small, statistically significant increases in formoterol AUC0-t, AUC0-24h and t 
½ following co-administration of cimetidine and CHF 5993; urinary excretion was 
unaffected. There were no significant differences for either BDP or B17MP. There 
were few adverse events (AEs), and no serious AEs.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study indicates that there is no clinically relevant 
drug-drug interaction between CHF 5993 and cimetidine.

DOI: 10.1007/s13318-016-0345-2
PMCID: PMC5340825
PMID: 27209586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was funded by Chiesi Farmaceutici 
SpA. Writing support was provided by David Young of Young Medical Communications 
and Consulting Ltd. This support was funded by Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA. All 
procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance 
with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research 
committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments. 
Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the 
study. FM is an employee of Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA. GC is an employee of Chiesi 
Farmaceutici SpA. LS is an employee of Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA. AM is an 
employee of Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA. DA is an employee of Chiesi Farmaceutici 
SpA.


497. Postepy Dermatol Alergol. 2019 Apr;36(2):202-210. doi: 10.5114/ada.2018.76144. 
Epub 2018 Apr 3.

Factors affecting the choice of therapeutic regimens in asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease patients and patient adherence to the therapies 
prescribed.

Nastałek P(1), Kurek A(2), Almgren-Rachtan A(3), Mastalerz-Migas A(4), Doniec 
Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonology Clinic, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Vascular and Transplant Surgery, Medical 
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(3)Department of Pharmacovigilance, Europharma, Katowice, Poland.
(4)Department of Family Medicine, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Pneumonology, Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases, 
Rabka Branch, Rabka-Zdroj, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma are the 
most common chronic respiratory diseases worldwide. At the moment, there is no 
information about the preferences of Polish specialists as regards the treatment 
of asthma and COPD or factors influencing the choice of particular treatment 
regimens.
AIM: To determine the treatment options most commonly used by experienced 
pulmonologists and allergists for asthma and COPD and to identify the factors 
affecting the choice of a particular therapy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The survey included 224 doctors (pulmonologists and 
allergists) across Poland and concerned patients diagnosed with asthma (n = 
4358) and COPD (n = 3062).
RESULTS: In the case of asthma, the most common therapy applied was inhaled 
glucocorticosteroids and long-acting beta agonists. According to 27.2% of doctors, 
combination therapy was used in 70-80% of patients while 23.7% declared that the 
proportion of patients receiving such a treatment exceeded 80%. In the case of 
COPD, anticholinergics were most frequently prescribed when inhaled 
glucocorticosteroids and long-acting beta agonists had proved insufficient. 
According to 21% of specialists, the percentage of patients treated so was 
41-50%, while 19% declared the use of this treatment in 71-80% of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The most common treatments for asthma and COPD in Poland are 
inhaled glucocorticosteroids and long-acting beta agonists. The main factors 
influencing treatment decisions are the current GINA and GOLD recommendations as 
well as patients' age, comorbidities, and price of treatment.

DOI: 10.5114/ada.2018.76144
PMCID: PMC6627257
PMID: 31320855

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


498. Ann Pharmacother. 2020 Jun 4:1060028020932134. doi: 10.1177/1060028020932134. 
Online ahead of print.

Dual- Versus Mono-Bronchodilator Therapy in Moderate to Severe COPD: A 
Meta-analysis.

Lipari M(1)(2), Kale-Pradhan PB(1)(2), Wilhelm SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Ascension St. John Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.

Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) guidelines recommend 
both long-acting and dual bronchodilator therapy. It is unclear if there are 
differences in efficacy and safety. Objective: This meta-analysis evaluates the 
efficacy of dual therapy with long-acting β-agonist (LABA) + long acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) compared with monotherapy with LAMA for COPD. 
Methods: We searched PubMed, CINAHL, and Web of Science databases from inception 
through March 2020 to identify English-language, prospective randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) that compared dual therapy with monotherapy in adult 
patients with COPD. Risk of bias was assessed using the Jadad score. Overall 
analysis was performed using Review Manager 5.3. Treatment effect was determined 
with the random-effects model using the Mantel-Haenszel method and was reported 
as mean difference (MD) with 95% CI. Results: A total of 18 RCTs were included 
(n = 6086; median Jadad score 5/5) that compared LAMA + LABA with LAMA. There 
was a greater improvement in forced expiratory volume at 1 s (FEV1) with dual 
therapy compared with LAMA: MD = 0.08; 95% CI = [0.05, 0.11]. There was no 
difference in St George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scores between groups: 
OR = -0.85; 95% CI = [-1.83, 0.13]. There were no differences in overall adverse 
events (OR = 1.00; 95% CI = 0.92, 1.09), serious adverse events (OR = 1.01; 95% 
CI = 0.86, 1.18), or cardiovascular events (OR = 0.88; 95% CI = 0.58, 1.34). 
Conclusion and Relevance: Dual therapy improves FEV1 and is as safe as LAMA. 
Dual therapy does not improve SGRQ scores more than LAMA.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028020932134
PMID: 32493039


499. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2019 Jul;370(1):127-136. doi: 10.1124/jpet.118.255620. 
Epub 2019 May 13.

Pharmacological Profile of AZD8871 (LAS191351), a Novel Inhaled Dual M(3) 
Receptor Antagonist/β (2)-Adrenoceptor Agonist Molecule with Long-Lasting 
Effects and Favorable Safety Profile.

Aparici M(1), Carcasona C(2), Ramos I(2), Montero JL(2), Otal R(2), Ortiz JL(2), 
Cortijo J(2), Puig C(2), Vilella D(2), De Alba J(2), Doe C(2), Gavaldà A(2), 
Miralpeix M(2).

Author information:
(1)Almirall, Research & Development Center, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Barcelona, 
Spain (M.A., C.C., I.R., J.L.M., R.O., C.P., D.V., J.D.A., C.D., A.G., M.M.); 
and Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Valencia, 
Valencia, Spain (J.L.O., J.C.) monica.aparici@almirall.com.
(2)Almirall, Research & Development Center, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Barcelona, 
Spain (M.A., C.C., I.R., J.L.M., R.O., C.P., D.V., J.D.A., C.D., A.G., M.M.); 
and Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Valencia, 
Valencia, Spain (J.L.O., J.C.).

AZD8871 is a novel muscarinic antagonist and β 2-adrenoceptor agonist in 
development for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This study describes the 
pharmacological profile of AZD8871 in in vitro and in vivo assays. AZD8871 is 
potent at the human M3 receptor (pIC50 in binding assays: 9.5) and shows kinetic 
selectivity for the M3 (half-life: 4.97 hours) over the M2 receptor (half-life: 
0.46 hour). It is selective for the β 2-adrenoceptor over the β 1 and β 3 
subtypes (3- and 6-fold, respectively) and shows dual antimuscarinic and β 
2-adrenoceptor functional activity in isolated guinea pig tissue (pIC50 in 
electrically stimulated trachea: 8.6; pEC50 in spontaneous tone isolated 
trachea: 8.8, respectively), which are sustained over time. AZD8871 exhibits a 
higher muscarinic component than batefenterol in human bronchi, with a shift in 
potency under propranolol blockade of 2- and 6-fold, respectively, together with 
a persisting relaxation (5.3% recovery at 8 hours). Nebulized AZD8871 prevents 
acetylcholine-induced bronchoconstriction in both guinea pig and dog with 
minimal effects on salivation and heart rate at doses with bronchoprotective 
activity. Moreover, AZD8871 shows long-lasting effects in dog, with a 
bronchoprotective half-life longer than 24 hours. In conclusion, these studies 
demonstrate that AZD8871 is a dual-acting molecule with a high muscarinic 
component and a long residence time at the M3 receptor; moreover, its 
preclinical profile in animal models suggests a once-daily dosing in humans and 
a favorable safety profile. Thus, AZD8871 has the potential to be a next 
generation of inhaled bronchodilators in respiratory diseases.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.118.255620
PMID: 31085697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Pharmacoeconomic Review Report: Tiotropium bromide monohydrate and olodaterol 
hydrochloride (Inspiolto Respimat) for oral inhalation [Internet].

Ottawa (ON): Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health; 2015 Dec.
CADTH Common Drug Reviews.

Inspiolto Respimat (tiotropium bromide monohydrate/olodaterol hydrochloride 
[TIO/OLO]) is a fixeddose combination of a long‐acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA), tiotropium, and a long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA), olodaterol, 
indicated for the long-term, once‐daily maintenance bronchodilator treatment of 
airflow obstruction in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), including chronic bronchitis and emphysema. TIO/OLO is available as a 
multi-use cartridge to be used with the Respimat device, which provides 2.5 mcg 
of TIO and 2.5 mcg of OLO per actuation. The recommended dose of TIO/OLO is two 
actuations once daily ($2.10 daily). The manufacturer is requesting a listing as 
per the Health Canada-approved indication and in a similar manner to other 
fixed-dose combinations indacaterol plus glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) and 
umeclidinium plus vilanterol (UMEC/VI): for the long-term, once‐daily 
maintenance bronchodilator treatment of airflow obstruction in patients with 
COPD, including chronic bronchitis and emphysema, if the following clinical 
criteria are met: moderate to severe COPD as defined by spirometry; inadequate 
response to a long-acting bronchodilator (LABA) or long acting beta agonists. 
[Table: see text]

Copyright © 2015 Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health.

PMID: 30883067


501. Saudi Pharm J. 2016 Mar;24(2):147-52. doi: 10.1016/j.jsps.2015.01.005. Epub 2015 
Jan 12.

Investigation of the efficacy of generic and brand-name tiotropium bromide in 
the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A randomized 
comparative trial.

Panahi Y(1), Ghanei M(1), Behzadi M(1), Salehi M(1), Soflaei SS(2), Sahebkar 
A(3).

Author information:
(1)Chemical Injuries Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Neurogenic Inflammation Research Center, Department of Modern Sciences and 
Technologies, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Biotechnology Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran; Cardiometabolic Research Centre, Royal Perth Hospital, School of 
Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: The beneficial effects of tiotropium bromide, a long acting 
anticholinergic bronchodilator, in the management of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease have been shown in previous studies. The present study aimed 
to compare the efficacy and safety of generic (Tiova®) and brand-name (Spiriva®) 
tiotropium preparations in patients with COPD.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: In this randomized double-blind parallel-group trial, 79 
patients with documented COPD were assigned to Tiova® or Spiriva® for a period 
of 4 weeks. Assessment of pulmonary function (using spirometry), quality-of-life 
(using St. George respiratory Questionnaire [SGRQ]) and severity of respiratory 
symptoms (using breathlessness, cough and sputum scale [BCSS]) was performed at 
baseline and at the end of treatment period.
RESULTS: There were significant increases in FEV1 and reductions in FVC by the 
end of study in both Tiova® and Spiriva® groups. FEV1/FVC ratio did not change 
significantly neither in the Tiova® nor in Spiriva® group. Overall SGRQ score as 
well as subscale scores of symptoms, activity and impacts were improved by both 
drugs. In the BCSS scale, the frequency and severity of three main symptoms 
(dyspnea, cough and sputum) was decreased by both drugs. Baseline as well as 
post-treatment values of spirometric parameters, SGRQ and BCSS scores was 
comparable between the groups, apart from a lower post-treatment frequency of 
cough and sputum in the Spiriva® versus Tiova® group. There was no report of 
adverse events in either of the study groups.
CONCLUSION: The findings of this comparative trial showed equivalent efficacy 
and safety of Spiriva® and Tiova® in lessening the symptoms as well as improving 
the quality of life in patients with COPD. This finding has an important 
translational value given the significantly lower costs of generic versus 
brand-name products.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsps.2015.01.005
PMCID: PMC4792902
PMID: 27013907


502. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2015 Aug 19;13:13. doi: 10.1186/s12962-015-0040-1. 
eCollection 2015.

Cost-effectiveness of tiotropium versus usual care and glycopyrronium in the 
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Sweden.

Eklund O(1), Afzal F(2), Borgström F(1).

Author information:
(1)Quantify Research AB, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Norway KS, Asker, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium (TIO) is a well-established bronchodilator, LAMA 
(long acting beta agonists), for the treatment of moderate to very severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Clinical evidence suggests that 
tiotropium is superior to usual non-LAMA care (UC) but may also have benefits 
compared to other LAMAs in preventing and limiting the effects of severe 
exacerbations. The primary objective of this study was to undertake a 
cost-effectiveness analysis of adding tiotropium to usual care versus usual care 
alone. A secondary objective was to assess the cost-effectiveness of tiotropium 
compared to glycopyrronium (GLY), another LAMA. The study was conducted with a 
Swedish setting in mind.
METHODS: A Markov cohort model, incorporating the effects of exacerbations, was 
populated with efficacy data from the UPLIFT and SPARK trials and 
epidemiological data relevant for a Swedish patient population. Treatment 
efficacy of tiotropium was modelled as a lowering of the risk of exacerbations 
and as a slow-down of overall disease progression. The model followed patients 
over their remaining life-time.
RESULTS: The base case analysis showed that patients treated with tiotropium 
gained 0.07 quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) compared to usual care alone at 
an incremental cost of SEK 15,041, resulting in a cost per QALY gained of SEK 
224,850. Compared to glycopyrronium the QALY gained was estimated to 0.23 QALYs 
in favour of tiotropium at an incremental cost of SEK 2423, yielding a cost per 
QALY gained of SEK 10,456. The results were mainly driven by differences in the 
risk of severe exacerbations.
CONCLUSION: At the current implicit willingness-to-pay (WTP) per QALY threshold 
in Sweden, the results from this study indicate that tiotropium is a highly 
cost-effective intervention when added to usual non-LAMA care in the treatment 
of moderate to very severe COPD in Sweden. In addition, tiotropium is a highly 
cost-effective intervention when compared to glycopyrronium monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12962-015-0040-1
PMCID: PMC4539698
PMID: 26288574


503. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2018 Oct 5;162:D2987.

[Treatment strategy in asthma: is the aim symptom reduction or controlling 
exacerbations?].

[Article in Dutch]

In 't Veen JCCM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Franciscus Gasthuis en Vlietland, Expertisecentrum Astma, COPD en 
Respiratoire Allergie, Rotterdam.
(2)Contact: J.C.C.M. in 't Veen (h.intveen@franciscus.nl).

Asthmatic patients with recurrent exacerbations may benefit from the single 
maintenance and reliever therapy (SMART) strategy, whilst patients with 
persistent symptoms may benefit from the addition of a long-acting muscarin 
antagonist (LAMA) to inhaled steroid therapy (with or without a long-acting 
beta2-agonist). However, an integrated approach is first needed to confirm 
diagnosis and to identify non-pharmacological, treatable traits.

PMID: 30358366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


504. ChemMedChem. 2018 Oct 8;13(19):2053-2056. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201800387. Epub 2018 
Aug 31.

A More Sustainable Process for Preparation of the Muscarinic Acetylcholine 
Antagonist Umeclidinium Bromide.

Espadinha M(1), Lourenço NMT(2), Sobral L(2), Antunes R(2), Santos MMM(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Prof. Gama Pinto, 1649-003, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Hovione Farmaciência SA, Sete Casas, 2674-506, Loures, Portugal.

A more sustainable process for the synthesis of the long acting muscarinic 
acetylcholine antagonist umeclidinium bromide is described. Specifically, we 
report the synthesis of ethyl 1-(2-chloroethyl)-4-piperidinecarboxylate, a key 
intermediate in the preparation of umeclidinium bromide, in good yields using 
triethylamine, as well as the identification and characterization of the 
by-product formed in this reaction. This new method of synthesis leads to an 
improvement in yield over that of previously reported protocols using potassium 
carbonate as base (65.6 % versus 38.6 %). Moreover, in the final synthetic step 
of the process to obtain umeclidinium bromide, we were able to replace the use 
of toxic solvents (acetonitrile/chloroform) with water. The use of this green 
solvent allowed precipitation of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) from 
the reaction medium with high purity and in high yield. Overall, we have 
developed a more efficient and environmentally friendly process for the 
synthesis of the umeclidinium bromide API with a higher overall yield (37.8 % 
versus previously reported overall yield of 9.7 %).

© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.201800387
PMID: 30070428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


505. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2019 Dec 1;384:114778. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2019.114778. 
Epub 2019 Oct 13.

Tiotropium bromide, a long acting muscarinic receptor antagonist triggers 
intracellular calcium signalling in the heart.

Cassambai S(1), Mee CJ(2), Renshaw D(2), Hussain A(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sports, Exercise and Life Sciences, Coventry University, Coventry 
CV1 5FB, United Kingdom; Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of 
Leicester, NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, Leicester, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: sc720@le.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Sports, Exercise and Life Sciences, Coventry University, Coventry 
CV1 5FB, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Tiotropium bromide (TB) is a long acting muscarinic 
receptor antagonist used to manage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Recent meta-analyses suggest an increased risk of cardiovascular events with TB. 
Ca2+/calmodulin dependent kinase II (CaMKII) and L-type Ca2+ channels regulate 
Ca2+ concentrations allowing management of Ca2+ across membranes. Pathological 
increases in Ca2+ are initially slow and progressive, however once the cytosolic 
concentration rises >1-3 μM from ~100 nM, calcium overload occurs and can lead 
to cell death. Ipratropium bromide, a short acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonist has previously been found to induce Ca2+ mediated eryptosis. The aim 
of this study was to investigate the role of Ca2+ in Tiotropium bromide mediated 
cardiotoxicity.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Isolated Sprague-Dawley rat hearts were perfused with TB 
(10-0.1 nM) ± KN-93 (400 nM) or nifedipine (1 nM). Hearts were stained to 
determine infarct size (%) using triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC), or snap 
frozen to determine p-CaMKII (Thr286) expression. Cardiomyocytes were isolated 
using a modified Langendorff perfusion and enzymatic dissociation before 
preparation for Fluo 3-AM staining and flow cytometric analysis.
KEY RESULTS: TB increased infarct size compared to controls by 6.91-8.41%, with 
no effect on haemodynamic function. KN-93/nifedipine with TB showed a 5.90/7.38% 
decrease in infarct size compared to TB alone, the combined use of KN-93 with TB 
also showed a significant increase in left ventricular developed pressure whilst 
nifedipine with TB showed a significant decrease in coronary flow. TB showed a 
42.73% increase in p-CaMKII (Thr286) versus control, and increased Ca2+ 
fluorescence by 30.63% in cardiomyocytes.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first pre-clinical 
study to show that Tiotropium bromide induces Ca2+ signalling via CaMKII and 
L-type Ca2+ channels to result in cell damage. This has significant clinical 
impact due to long term use of TB in COPD patients, and warrants assessment of 
cardiac drug safety.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2019.114778
PMID: 31618660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


506. Prim Health Care Res Dev. 2020 Jun 5;21:e16. doi: 10.1017/S1463423620000079.

Treatment of COPD and COPD-heart failure comorbidity in primary care in 
different stages of the disease.

Pirina P(1)(2), Zinellu E(1), Martinetti M(3), Spada C(2), Piras B(2), Collu 
C(2), Fois AG(1)(2); COPD-HF Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria, 
Sassari, Italy.
(2)Respiratory Unit, Department of Medical, Surgical and Experimental Sciences, 
University of Sassari, Sassari, 07100Italy.
(3)General Practitioner, Carbonia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic 
respiratory disease that may have a negative impact on both patients' quality of 
life and survival. Patients with COPD frequently suffer from heart failure (HF), 
likely owing to several shared risk factors.
AIM: To evaluate the differences in treatment of COPD with and without HF 
comorbidity according to COPD severity in the general practitioner setting.
METHODS: We conducted an observational, retrospective study using data obtained 
from the Italian Health Search Database, which collects information generated by 
the routine activity of general practitioners. The study sample included 225 
patients with COPD, alone or combined with HF.
FINDINGS: It has been found that the prevalence of some comorbidities such as 
diabetes and HF significantly increases with the severity of COPD. Regarding 
pharmacological treatment, a reduction in the prescription of individually 
administered long-acting β 2-agonists (LABAs) and long acting beta agonistss 
(LAMAs) has been observed with increasing severity of the disease. Moreover, an 
increase in the prescription of both the combination of the two bronchodilators 
(LABA + LAMA) and their association with inhaled corticosteroids has been 
observed with increasing severity of COPD. The prescription of β-blockers in 
patients with COPD suffering from HF comorbidity decreases from 100% in stage I 
to less than 50% in the other stages of COPD. This study shows that general 
practitioners do not follow the guidelines recommendations for the management of 
patients with COPD in the different stages of the disease, with and without HF 
comorbidity, as well as in the management of HF. Further efforts must be made to 
ensure adequate treatment for these patients.

DOI: 10.1017/S1463423620000079
PMCID: PMC7303800
PMID: 32498750


507. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jun 30;12:1903-1913. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S134420. eCollection 2017.

Intracellular interactions of umeclidinium and vilanterol in human airway smooth 
muscle.

Shaikh N(1)(2), Johnson M(3), Hall DA(4), Chung KF(1)(2), Riley JH(3), Worsley 
S(5), Bhavsar PK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Studies, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London.
(2)Biomedical Research Unit, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust, London.
(3)Respiratory Global Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge.
(4)Fibrosis and Lung Injury Development Planning Unit, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Stevenage.
(5)Respiratory Research & Development, GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: Intracellular mechanisms of action of umeclidinium (UMEC), a 
long acting muscarinic receptor antagonist, and vilanterol (VI), a long-acting 
beta-adrenoceptor (betaR) agonist, were investigated in target cells: human airway 
smooth-muscle cells (ASMCs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: ASMCs from tracheas of healthy lung-transplant donors 
were treated with VI, UMEC, UMEC and VI combined, or control compounds 
(salmeterol, propranolol, ICI 118.551, or methacholine [MCh]). Cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) was measured using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, 
intracellular free calcium ([Ca2+]i) using a fluorescence assay, and regulator 
of G-protein signaling 2 (RGS2) messenger RNA using real-time quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: VI and salmeterol (10-12-10-6 M) induced cAMP production from ASMCs in 
a concentration-dependent manner, which was greater for VI at all 
concentrations. betaR antagonism by propranolol or ICI 118.551 (10-12-10-4 M) 
resulted in concentration-dependent inhibition of VI-induced cAMP production, 
and ICI 118.551 was more potent. MCh (5×10-6 M, 30 minutes) attenuated 
VI-induced cAMP production (P<0.05), whereas pretreatment with UMEC (10-8 M, 1 
hour) restored the magnitude of VI-induced cAMP production. ASMC stimulation 
with MCh (10-11-5×10-6 M) resulted in a concentration-dependent increase in 
[Ca2+]i, which was attenuated with UMEC pretreatment. Reduction of MCh-induced 
[Ca2+]i release was greater with UMEC + VI versus UMEC. UMEC enhanced VI-induced 
RGS2 messenger RNA expression.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that UMEC reverses cholinergic inhibition of 
VI-induced cAMP production, and is a more potent muscarinic receptor antagonist 
when in combination with VI versus either alone.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S134420
PMCID: PMC5501633
PMID: 28721035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure NS reports no conflicts of interest 
in this work. PKB received research support from GlaxoSmithKline. KFC has been 
on advisory boards for GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, and Gilead, and received research 
support from the National Institute for Health Research, Medical Research 
Council UK, Asthma UK, and the Wellcome Trust. DAH, JHR, and SW are employees of 
GlaxoSmithKline and hold GlaxoSmithKline stocks/shares. MJ is an ex-employee of 
GlaxoSmithKline and is now retired; he holds GlaxoSmithKline stocks/shares.


508. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Apr;61:101898. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2020.101898. Epub 
2020 Jan 21.

Dual use of bronchodilators versus monotherapy, and its impact on pulmonary 
rehabilitation in COPD patients.

Benavides-Cordoba V(1), Aviles S(2), Ascuntar C(2), Orozco L(3), Mosquera R(4), 
Rivera J(5).

Author information:
(1)Institución Universitaria Escuela Nacional del Deporte, Universidad del 
Valle, Colombia. Electronic address: vicente.benavides@correounivalle.edu.co.
(2)Institución Universitaria Escuela Nacional del Deporte, Colombia.
(3)Clínica Neumologica del Pacifico, Universidad Santiago de Cali, Colombia.
(4)Clinica Neumologica del Pacifico, Colombia.
(5)Clinica Neumológica del Pacifico, Institución universitaria Escuela Nacional 
del deporte, Colombia.

INTRODUCTION: Long-acting bronchodilators are the therapy with the best evidence 
for treating stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Long-acting 
combinations of beta agonists and anticholinergics (LABA-LAMA) are recommended in 
advanced stages when monotherapy has not generated the desired effects. 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation (PR) is an effective non-pharmacological strategy. The 
aim of this study was to compare the results obtained in patients with COPD who 
received monotherapy versus dual bronchodilator therapy in terms of functional 
aerobic capacity, symptoms and quality of life.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Prospective non randomized intervention study; the 
patients were divided into two groups: in one group patients were treated with 
LAMA (Tiotropium Bromide, 5 μg every 24 h) and in the other group patients were 
treated with LABA + LAMA (Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium, 110/50 μg once a day). 
After receiving the concept of pulmonology, patients were intervened with 8 
weeks of PR. The study was approved by the committee of the Clinica Neumológica 
del Pacifico in Cali and the Institución Universitaria Escuela Nacional del 
Deporte, Colombia. To determine the differences, t pair test for intragroup, and 
t-test was performed for intergroup analysis. For all tests, a p-value <0.05 was 
considered as statistically significant.
RESULTS: 53 patients participated in this study, of which 20 were assigned to 
the LAMA group and 33 to the LAMA + LABA group. Patients in both groups 
presented changes in the distance of the 6MWT, in the VO2e, dyspnea and in all 
the SGRQ domains. Regarding the comparison between groups, there were found no 
differences in the variables at the beginning of the PR and significant 
differences (p < 0.05) at the end of the 8 week-period in favor of the 
LABA + LAMA group, in symptoms with the mMRC scale, functional aerobic capacity 
with the 6 min walking test and in health related quality of life specifically 
in the symptoms domain, where the dual therapy group obtained better results.
CONCLUSION: The addition of LABA to the treatment with LAMA showed better 
response results compared with the monotherapy in patients with COPD who 
attended PR.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2020.101898
PMID: 31978547


509. J Asthma Allergy. 2015 Jan 14;8:1-13. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S76639. eCollection 2015.

long acting muscarinic antagonist use in adults with asthma: real-life 
prescribing and outcomes of add-on therapy with tiotropium bromide.

Price D(1), Kaplan A(2), Jones R(3), Freeman D(4), Burden A(5), Gould S(5), von 
Ziegenweidt J(5), Ali M(5), King C(5), Thomas M(6).

Author information:
(1)Academic Centre of Primary Care, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen ; Research 
in Real-Life, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Family Physician Airways Group of Canada, Richmond Hill, ON, Canada.
(3)Centre for Clinical Trials and Health Research, Plymouth University, 
Plymouth, UK.
(4)Norfolk Community Health and Care NHS Trust, Norwich, UK.
(5)Research in Real-Life, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Primary Care Research, University of Southhampton, Southhampton, UK.

BACKGROUND: Randomized controlled trials indicate that addition of a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) such as tiotropium may improve asthma control and 
reduce exacerbation risk in patients with poorly controlled asthma, but broader 
clinical studies are needed to investigate the effectiveness of LAMA in 
real-life asthma care.
METHODS: Medical records of adults with asthma (aged ≥18 years) prescribed 
tiotropium were obtained from the UK Optimum Patient Care Research Database for 
the period 2001-2013. Patients diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease were excluded, but no other clinical exclusions were applied. Two 
primary outcomes were compared in the year before (baseline) and the year after 
(outcome) addition of tiotropium: exacerbations (asthma-related hospital 
emergency department attendance or inpatient admission, or acute oral 
corticosteroid course) and acute respiratory events (exacerbation or antibiotic 
prescription with lower respiratory consultation). Secondary outcomes included 
lung function test results and short-acting beta agonist usage. The Wilcoxon 
signed-rank test was used for variables measured on the interval scale, the 
marginal homogeneity test for categorized variables, and the paired t-test for 
lung function indices.
RESULTS: Of the 2,042 study patients, 83% were prescribed an inhaled 
corticosteroid and 68% a long-acting beta agonist during the baseline year; 67% 
were prescribed both. Comparing baseline and outcome years, the percentage of 
patients having at least one exacerbation decreased from 37% to 27% (P<0.001) 
and the percentage having at least one acute respiratory event decreased from 
58% to 47% (P<0.001). There were no significant changes in lung function, and 
usage of short-acting beta agonists (in salbutamol/albuterol equivalents) 
increased from a median (interquartile range) of 274 (110, 548) to 329 (110, 
603) μg/day (P=0.01).
CONCLUSION: In this real-life asthma population, addition of LAMA therapy was 
associated with significant decreases in the incidence of exacerbations and 
antibiotic prescriptions for lower respiratory tract infections in the following 
year.

DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S76639
PMCID: PMC4298307
PMID: 25609985


510. J Asthma Allergy. 2017 Aug 14;10:231-236. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S140577. eCollection 
2017.

The evolving role of tiotropium in asthma.

McIvor ER(1), McIvor RA(2).

Author information:
(1)Queen's University, Belfast, UK.
(2)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Firestone Institute for 
Respiratory Health, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Tiotropium is a long acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) that exerts its 
bronchodilatory effect by blocking endogenous acetylcholine receptors in the 
airways. Its safety and efficacy are well established for the treatment of COPD, 
and it is now being recognized for its role in improving lung function and 
control in asthma. This review discusses the evolving role of tiotropium 
delivered by the Respimat® in patients across the range of asthma severities and 
ages, and provides an overview of safety and efficacy data. Tiotropium is the 
only LAMA currently approved for the treatment of asthma, and evidence from a 
large-scale clinical trial program, including several Phase III studies in 
adults, has demonstrated that tiotropium improves lung function and asthma 
control, with a safety profile comparable with that of placebo. Clinical trials 
in adolescent patients (aged 12-17 years) have also shown improvements in lung 
function and trends toward improved asthma control. Of note, the efficacy and 
safety profiles are consistent regardless of baseline characteristics and 
phenotype. Given the large and growing body of evidence, it is likely that as 
clinical experience with tiotropium increases, this treatment may possibly 
emerge as the key choice for add-on therapy to inhaled 
corticosteroids/long-acting beta-agonists, and in patients who do not tolerate 
long-acting bronchodilators or other medications, in the future.

DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S140577
PMCID: PMC5565260
PMID: 28860828

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure RA McIvor is an employee of McMaster 
University and St Joseph’s Healthcare, Hamilton, Ontario. The authors disclose a 
father/daughter collaboration. The other author reports no conflict of interest 
in this work.


511. BMC Med. 2018 Jul 26;16(1):115. doi: 10.1186/s12916-018-1104-9.

Medications that reduce emergency hospital admissions: an overview of systematic 
reviews and prioritisation of treatments.

Bobrovitz N(1)(2), Heneghan C(3)(4), Onakpoya I(3)(4), Fletcher B(3), Collins 
D(3)(5), Tompson A(3)(6), Lee J(3), Nunan D(3)(4), Fisher R(3)(7), Scott 
B(8)(9), O'Sullivan J(3)(4), Van Hecke O(3), Nicholson BD(3), Stevens S(3), 
Roberts N(10), Mahtani KR(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, 
Radcliffe Observatory Quarter, Woodstock Road, Oxford, OX2 6GG, United Kingdom. 
niklas.bobrovitz@phc.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom. niklas.bobrovitz@phc.ox.ac.uk.
(3)Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, 
Radcliffe Observatory Quarter, Woodstock Road, Oxford, OX2 6GG, United Kingdom.
(4)Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(6)Faculty of Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(7)The Health Foundation, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(9)Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Canada.
(10)Bodelian Libraries, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    BMC Med. 2018 Oct 5;16(1):169.

BACKGROUND: Rates of emergency hospitalisations are increasing in many 
countries, leading to disruption in the quality of care and increases in cost. 
Therefore, identifying strategies to reduce emergency admission rates is a key 
priority. There have been large-scale evidence reviews to address this issue; 
however, there have been no reviews of medication therapies, which have the 
potential to reduce the use of emergency health-care services. The objectives of 
this study were to review systematically the evidence to identify medications 
that affect emergency hospital admissions and prioritise therapies for quality 
measurement and improvement.
METHODS: This was a systematic review of systematic reviews. We searched 
MEDLINE, PubMed, the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews & Database of 
Abstracts of Reviews of Effects, Google Scholar and the websites of ten major 
funding agencies and health charities, using broad search criteria. We included 
systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials that examined the effect of 
any medication on emergency hospital admissions among adults. We assessed the 
quality of reviews using AMSTAR. To prioritise therapies, we assessed the 
quality of trial evidence underpinning meta-analysed effect estimates and 
cross-referenced the evidence with clinical guidelines.
RESULTS: We identified 140 systematic reviews, which included 1968 unique 
randomised controlled trials and 925,364 patients. Reviews contained 100 
medications tested in 47 populations. We identified high-to moderate-quality 
evidence for 28 medications that reduced admissions. Of these medications, 11 
were supported by clinical guidelines in the United States, the United Kingdom 
and Europe. These 11 therapies were for patients with heart failure 
(angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, 
aldosterone receptor antagonists and digoxin), stable coronary artery disease 
(intensive statin therapy), asthma exacerbations (early inhaled corticosteroids 
in the emergency department and anticholinergics), chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (long acting muscarinic antagonists and long-acting beta-2 adrenoceptor 
agonists) and schizophrenia (second-generation antipsychotics and 
depot/maintenance antipsychotics).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified 11 medications supported by strong evidence and 
clinical guidelines that could be considered in quality monitoring and 
improvement strategies to help reduce emergency hospital admission rates. The 
findings are relevant to health systems with a large burden of chronic disease 
and those managing increasing pressures on acute health-care services.

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-018-1104-9
PMCID: PMC6060538
PMID: 30045724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study did not require ethical approval. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: All authors have completed the uniform disclosure form of 
the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors at 
www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and declare the following. They have not had 
any support from any organisation for the submitted work. They have not had any 
financial relationship with any organisations that might have an interest in the 
submitted work in the previous 3 years. There have been no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work. One of 
our co-authors (CH) was an author of a study included in this review 
(Neuraminidase inhibitors for preventing and treating influenza in healthy 
adults and children). This did not influence the current submitted work. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


512. Int J Clin Pharm. 2020 Feb;42(1):40-50. doi: 10.1007/s11096-019-00935-y. Epub 
2019 Nov 13.

Benefits, risks and impacts on quality of life of medications used in 
multimorbid older adults: a Delphi study.

Sirois C(1)(2)(3), Lunghi C(4), Berthelot W(5), Laroche ML(6)(7)(8), Frini A(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, Laval University, Quebec, 
Canada. Caroline.Sirois@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(2)Centre d'excellence sur le vieillissement de Québec, CIUSSS-CN, Hôpital 
St-Sacrement, Local L2-28, 1050, Chemin Ste-Foy, Quebec, QC, G1S 4L8, Canada. 
Caroline.Sirois@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(3)Centre de recherche sur les soins et les services de première ligne de 
l'Université Laval, Quebec, Canada. Caroline.Sirois@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(4)Department of Nursing, UQAR, Lévis, Canada.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec, Canada.
(6)Service de Pharmacologie, Toxicologie et Pharmacovigilance, Centre Régional 
de Pharmacovigilance, de Pharmacoépidémiologie et d'information sur les 
médicaments, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Limoges, Limoges, France.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Limoges University, Limoges, France.
(8)INSERM 1248, Limoges University, Limoges, France.
(9)Department of Management, UQAR, Lévis, Canada.

Background Multimorbidity and polypharmacy are common in older people. Despite 
the existence of quality criteria for medication use among this population, 
there is little guidance for managing the complex pharmacological arsenal in a 
multimorbidity context. Objective To establish consensus on benefits, risks and 
impacts on quality of life of medications used in an older adult with three 
chronic diseases that require complex pharmacotherapy. Setting International 
experts in pharmacology. Method A panel of experts responded to three rounds of 
a Delphi survey. They assessed the benefits, risks and positive impacts on 
quality of life of 50 different medications or medication classes that could be 
used by a hypothetical multimorbid older patient aged 65-75 years, with type 2 
diabetes, heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Each aspect 
was evaluated on a 5-level Likert scale. Main outcome measure Percentage of 
agreement on each of the three aspects for all medication. Results Consensus was 
reached on 95% of items (166/174). Only two medication classes were associated 
with both the highest category of benefits and positive impacts on quality of 
life, and the lowest risk category: long acting beta agonistss and long-acting 
beta-2-agonists. Nine other medications/classes of medications were categorized 
within the highest benefits level (metformin, DPP-4-inhibitors, short-acting 
beta-2-agonists, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers, warfarin, non-vitamin K oral 
anticoagulants, nitrates and acetaminophen). Fifteen medications were included 
in the highest level of risks, among which warfarin and Non-vitamin K oral 
anticoagulants. Conclusions Medications recommended in clinical guidelines for 
individual diseases are generally considered positive for multimorbid older 
patients. Nevertheless, a non-negligible number of medications was deemed 
negative or very negative by our panelists. For multimorbid patients, 
individualizing treatment according to their preferences seems of utmost 
importance.

DOI: 10.1007/s11096-019-00935-y
PMID: 31721038


513. Pneumologie. 2015 Dec;69(12):704-710. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1563785. Epub 2015 Dec 
9.

[COPD Update 2015: Cell Biology goes Clinic? - Important Research Findings for 
Clinicians].

[Article in German]

Schmeck B(1), Jerrentrup L(1), Bals R(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Lungenforschung, Mitglied des Deutschen Zentrums für 
Lungenforschung (DZL), Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg.
(2)Universitätsklinikum des Saarlandes, Klinik für Innere Medizin V - 
Pneumologie, Allergologie, Beatmungs- und Umweltmedizin, Homburg/Saar.

The COPD is a very common, chronic, non-contagious disease causing high 
mortality as well as high socio-economical costs worldwide. Its clinical 
assessment progressively becomes more comprehensive including the lung function, 
the rate of exacerbations, the physical capacity, the sensation of dyspnoea, and 
comorbidities. On the other hand, our therapeutic options are very limited: 
Although there are several well-tolerated and effective combinable 
bronchodilators of the group of long-acting beta2-mimetics and anticholinergics, 
drugs causally affecting pathophysiology are barely available. As 
anti-inflammatory principles only inhaled glucocorticoids as well as one orally 
available inhibitor of phosphodiesterase 4 are approved, each improving the 
course of disease in a subgroup of patients. This lack of effective causative 
therapeutic principles on the one hand and of biomarkers clearly stratifying 
patients on the other hand to a large extend are caused by our limited 
understanding of the pathophysiology. Therefore, this review presents the 
current progress in clinical and experimental research on COPD with regard to 
clinical practice.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0035-1563785
PMID: 26649596


514. Respir Med. 2019 Sep;156:8-14. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.07.023. Epub 2019 Jul 
26.

Trends over time in COPD treatment choices by respiratory physicians: An 
analysis from the COLIBRI-COPD French cohort.

Roche N(1), Aguilaniu B(2), Zhi Li P(3), Hess D(4); COLIBRI collaborators.

Author information:
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Centre, Hôpital Cochin, 
AP-HP and Université Paris Descartes (UMR1016, Institut Cochin), Sorbonne Paris 
Cite, 27 Rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014, Paris, France. Electronic 
address: nicolas.roche@aphp.fr.
(2)Programme Colibri, Association pour la complémentarité des connaissances et 
des pratiques de la pneumologie (aCCPP), 19 avenue Marcelin Berthelot, 38100, 
Grenoble, France; Université Grenoble Alpes, Faculté de médecine et pharmacie, 
23 Avenue Maquis du Grésivaudan, 38700, La Tronche, France. Electronic address: 
b.aguilaniu@me.com.
(3)Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit, Research Institute of 
the McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, 5252, boul. de 
Maisonneuve Ouest, Montreal, QC H4a 3s5, Canada. Electronic address: 
pei.li@mail.mcgill.ca.
(4)Programme Colibri, Association pour la complémentarité des connaissances et 
des pratiques de la pneumologie (aCCPP), 19 avenue Marcelin Berthelot, 38100, 
Grenoble, France. Electronic address: david.hess@colibri-pneumo.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Over the last decade, new evidence and many guidelines have been 
published on COPD pharmacological treatments; prescriptions are often not in 
accordance with guidelines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Trends in physician treatment choices from February 2012 
to November 2018 (Feb.2012/Nov.2018) were analyzed using data from COPD patients 
(spirometry-confirmed diagnosis) included in the COLIBRI-COPD cohort. Inhaled 
drug treatments (short- or long-acting beta-agonist [SABA or LABA], short- or 
long acting beta agonists [SAMA or LAMA], or corticosteroid [ICS]) were 
classified into 5 treatment categories: "No initial maintenance treatment (IMT)" 
(untreated, or only SAMA or SABA); "1 long-acting bronchodilator (LABD)" (LABA 
or LAMA); "2 LABDs" (LABA + LAMA); "1 LABD + ICS" (LABA or LAMA + ICS); "2 
LABDs + ICS" (LABA + LAMA + ICS). For the purpose of the study, 4 periods were 
defined to achieve balanced samples (T1-T4).
RESULTS: Data from 4537 patients were collected. Over time, 3 major changes were 
observed: (1) an increase in treatment category "No IMT", mostly for GOLD 1 or 
GOLD A categories (GOLD A: from 19.1% at T1 to 41.2% at T4); (2) an increase in 
treatment category "2 LABDs" for GOLD 2 to 4 and GOLD A to D categories (GOLD B: 
from 15.4% to 29.7%); (3) a decrease in ICS use ("1 LABD + ICS" or "2 
LABDs + ICS"), mostly for GOLD 1 to 3 and GOLD A categories (GOLD A, 2 
LABDs + ICS: from 35.3% to 11.1%).
CONCLUSION: Changes over time in therapeutic profiles suggest that new evidence 
from scientific publications and recommendations may have had a rapid impact on 
clinical practice.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.07.023
PMID: 31374262


515. Respir Med. 2016 Aug;117:198-206. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.06.013. Epub 2016 Jun 
14.

Tiotropium improves lung function, exacerbation rate, and asthma control, 
independent of baseline characteristics including age, degree of airway 
obstruction, and allergic status.

Kerstjens HA(1), Moroni-Zentgraf P(2), Tashkin DP(3), Dahl R(4), Paggiaro P(5), 
Vandewalker M(6), Schmidt H(7), Engel M(8), Bateman ED(9).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Groningen Research 
Institute for Asthma and COPD, University Medical Center Groningen, Postbox 
30.001, 9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
h.a.m.kerstjens@umcg.nl.
(2)TA Respiratory Diseases, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Binger 
Straße 173, 55216 Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany. Electronic address: 
petra.moroni-zentgraf@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at UCLA, 37-131 Center for Health Sciences, 10833 Le Conte Avenue, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095-1690, USA. Electronic address: DTashkin@mednet.ucla.edu.
(4)Odense University Hospital, University of Southern Denmark, Sdr Boulevard, DK 
5000 Odense C, Denmark. Electronic address: Ronald.Dahl2@rsyd.dk.
(5)Dipartimento Cardio-Toracico e Vascolare, SD Fisiopatologia e Riabilitazione 
Respiratoria, AOUP, via Paradisa 2, 56124 Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: 
pierluigi.paggiaro@unipi.it.
(6)Clinical Research of the Ozarks, 601 W Nifong Blvd, Suite 2A, Columbia, MO 
65203, USA. Electronic address: drmlvand@aol.com.
(7)Global Biometrics and Data Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. 
KG, Birkendorfer Straße 65, 88400 Biberach an der Riss, Germany. Electronic 
address: hendrik.schmidt@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(8)TA Respiratory Diseases, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Binger 
Straße 173, 55216 Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany. Electronic address: 
michael.engel@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Mowbray 7700, Cape Town, 
South Africa. Electronic address: eric.bateman@uct.ac.za.

BACKGROUND: Many patients with asthma remain symptomatic despite treatment with 
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) with or without long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs). 
Tiotropium add-on to ICS plus a LABA has been shown to improve lung function and 
reduce exacerbation risk in patients with symptomatic asthma.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the efficacy of tiotropium add-on therapy is 
dependent on patients' baseline characteristics.
METHODS: Two randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, twin trials (NCT00772538 
and NCT00776984) of once-daily tiotropium Respimat(®) 5 μg add-on to ICS plus a 
LABA were performed in parallel in patients with severe symptomatic asthma. 
Exploratory subgroup analyses of peak forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), 
trough FEV1, time to first severe exacerbation, time to first episode of asthma 
worsening, and seven-question Asthma Control Questionnaire responder rate were 
performed to determine whether results were influenced by baseline 
characteristics.
RESULTS: 912 patients were randomized: 456 received tiotropium and 456 received 
placebo. Tiotropium improved lung function, reduced the risk of asthma 
exacerbations and asthma worsening, and improved asthma symptom control, 
compared with placebo, independent of baseline characteristics including gender, 
age, body mass index, disease duration, age at asthma onset, and FEV1 % 
predicted at screening and reversibility.
CONCLUSION: Once-daily tiotropium 5 μg compared with placebo improved lung 
function, reduced the risk of asthma exacerbations and asthma worsening, and 
improved asthma symptom control, independent of a broad range of baseline 
characteristics, as add-on to ICS plus LABAs in patients with severe symptomatic 
asthma.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; numbers NCT00772538 and NCT00776984 URL: 
www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2016.06.013
PMID: 27492532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]