1. Rev Med Liege. 2019 Jan;74(1):54-60.

[IMPACT study in COPD].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Corhay JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Pneumologie CHU Sart Tilman, Liège, Belgique.

The role of the anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator triple therapy, including a 
long acting ß2-agonist (LABA), a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and an 
inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), in the prevention of the exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is still not clearly established, and 
requires comparison with dual therapy (LABA-CSI or LABA-LAMA). IMPACT is a phase 
3, double-blind randomized study comparing the tritherapy (LABA-LAMA-ICS) in a 
single inhaler (vilanterol 25 ?g/umeclidinium 62.5 ?g/fluticasone furoate 100 
?g) with the LABA-ICS association (vilanterol 25 ?g-fluticasone furoate 100 ?g) 
and the combination LABA-LAMA (vilanterol 25 ?g/umeclidinium 62.5 ?g) on the 
reduction of the rate of exacerbation as the primary outcome, but also on the 
pulmonary function, the quality of life, the dyspnea and the mortality.Triple 
therapy by comparison with dual therapy (LABA-ICS or LABA-LAMA) improves 
numerous parameters such as the rate of moderate to severe exacerbations, the 
symptoms, the respiratory function, the quality of life, while being well 
tolerated. Finally, the IMPACT study gives an "evidence base" for the GOLD 
guidelines proposing triple therapy in symptomatic COPD patients presenting 
exacerbations despite dual therapy.

Publisher: La place de la trithérapie bronchodilatatrice et anti-inflammatoire, 
comprenant un bêta-2 mimétique à longue durée d’action (LABA), un 
anticholinergique à longue durée d’action (LAMA) et un corticostéroïde inhalé 
(CSI), dans la prévention des exacerbations de la bronchopneumopathie chronique 
obstructive (BPCO) n’est pas encore clairement établie, et nécessite une 
comparaison avec les associations de LABA-CSI ou les combinaisons LABA-LAMA. 
IMPACT est une étude randomisée en double aveugle de phase 3 comparant la 
trithérapie (LABA-LAMA-CSI) en un seul inhalateur (vilantérol 25 ?g/ 
uméclidinium 62,5 ?g/fluticasone furoate 100 ?g) avec une association LABA-CSI 
(vilantérol 25 ?g-fluticasone furoate 100 ?g) et une combinaison LABA-LAMA 
(vilantérol 25 ?g/uméclidinium 62,5 ?g) sur la réduction du taux d’exacerbations 
comme critère de jugement primaire, mais aussi sur la fonction respiratoire, la 
qualité de vie, la dyspnée et la mortalité. La trithérapie entraîne une 
diminution significative du taux d’exacerbations modérées ou sévères, améliore 
la dyspnée, la fonction respiratoire et la qualité de vie par rapport à 
l’association fluticasone-vilantérol et la bithérapie bronchodilatatrice 
uméclidinium-vilantérol chez des patients BPCO symptomatiques et présentant des 
exacerbations, tout en étant bien tolérée. Finalement, l’étude IMPACT apporte 
une évidence clinique aux directives du GOLD proposant la trithérapie chez des 
patients BPCO symptomatiques présentant toujours des exacerbations malgré une 
bithérapie.

PMID: 30680975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Drugs. 2019 Sep;79(13):1455-1466. doi: 10.1007/s40265-019-01186-x.

Glycopyrronium/Formoterol: A Review in COPD.

Al-Salama ZT(1), Frampton JE(2).

Author information:
(1)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand. demail@springer.com.
(2)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand.

Glycopyrronium/formoterol (Bevespi Aerosphere®) is a fixed-dose combination of 
the long-acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium bromide and the long-acting 
β2-agonist formoterol fumarate delivered via a pressurized metered dose inhaler 
(pMDI) and formulated using co-suspension delivery technology. It is approved in 
the USA and EU for use as maintenance treatment in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and in Japan to relieve symptoms in 
patients with COPD. In the PINNACLE trials in patients with moderate to very 
severe COPD, glycopyrronium/formoterol was associated with significantly greater 
improvements in lung function than its monocomponents and placebo at 24 weeks 
and its monocomponents and open-label tiotropium over 52 weeks. In the AERISTO 
trial, glycopyrronium/formoterol was non-inferior to umeclidinium/vilanterol dry 
powder inhaler for peak change in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) within 
2 h postdose, but not for the change in morning predose trough FEV1, over 
24 weeks. Glycopyrronium/formoterol was generally well tolerated in patients 
with moderate to very severe COPD, with most adverse events (AEs) being of mild 
or moderate severity. Thus, glycopyrronium/formoterol pMDI formulated using 
co-suspension delivery technology is a useful new addition that extends 
treatment options for patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-019-01186-x
PMID: 31468315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 May 16;14:1045-1051. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S155306. eCollection 2019.

Targeting IL-5 in COPD.

Narendra DK(1), Hanania NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Many patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) continue to 
experience exacerbations despite receiving standard-of-care treatments. Novel 
approaches to COPD treatment focus on understanding and targeting molecular 
mechanisms of airway inflammation, airway obstruction, remodeling and lung 
destruction. Several identified phenotypes and endotypes of COPD will pave the 
future path for a more personalized approach to therapy. Although well known to 
be associated with neutrophilic inflammation, COPD may also be driven by 
eosinophilic inflammation both at stable states and during exacerbation. 
Targeting eosinophilic inflammation has been successful in managing severe 
eosinophilic asthma and may hold promise in certain phenotypes of COPD. The most 
promising biologic treatments at an advanced stage of development are agents 
blocking interleukin (IL)-5 or its receptor. This review examines our current 
understanding of the eosinophilic inflammation in COPD and the rationale for 
IL-5 targeting agents.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S155306
PMCID: PMC6529620
PMID: 31190789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DKN has no conflicts of interest to disclose in 
this work. NAH received honoraria for serving as consultant or on advisory 
boards for GSK, Astra Zeneca, Sanofi/Regeneron, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Sunovion, Mylan and Gossamer Bio. His institutions have received research grant 
support on his behalf from Astra Zeneca, GSK, Boehringer Ingelheim.


4. Med Clin North Am. 2019 May;103(3):453-461. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2018.12.005. 
Epub 2019 Mar 14.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Evaluation and Management.

Duffy SP(1), Criner GJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at 
Temple University, 3401 North Broad Street, 7th Floor Parkinson Pavilion, 
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. Electronic address: Sean.duffy2@tuhs.temple.edu.
(2)Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at 
Temple University, 3401 North Broad Street, 7th Floor Parkinson Pavilion, 
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of death 
nationally and worldwide. Cigarette smoking is the most common risk factor in 
the development of COPD. Disease course is variable with some patients having a 
high degree of obstruction and minimal symptoms, whereas others with better lung 
function have a greater symptoms burden. The goal of pharmacologic therapy is to 
minimize symptoms, improve exercise tolerance, and reduce exacerbation risk. No 
pharmacologic therapy has been shown to improve survival in COPD. Pulmonology 
referral is recommended for patients with COPD with symptoms despite first-line 
inhaled therapy, frequent exacerbations, any hospitalizations, or 
moderate-to-severe disease.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcna.2018.12.005
PMID: 30955513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Kardiologiia. 2019 Mar 7;59(2S):47-55. doi: 10.18087/cardio.2486.

Features of the clinic and diagnosis of chronic heart failure in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

[Article in Russian]

Karoli NA(1), Borodkin AV, Rebrov AP.

Author information:
(1)Saratov State Medical University of V. I. Razumovsky.. fake@neicon.ru.

AIM: To elucidate clinical and diagnostic features of chronic heart failure 
(CHF) in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study included 239 patients with COPD and 42 patients 
with CHF without COPD. The first subgroup consisted of 60 patients with a 
history of myocardial infarction (MI) and the second subgroup consisted of 79 
patients without a history of MI. A general clinical examination, EchoCG, 
measurements of N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), galectin 
3, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) were performed for all 
patients.
RESULTS: The risk group for excluding HF as a cause of progressive dyspnea in 
COPD patients consisted of patients with the bronchitic phenotype who belonged 
to GOLD groups C and D with frequent exacerbations, increased hsCRP, reduced 
oxygen saturation, and impaired exercise tolerance. Patients with a history of 
MI constituted a special group of risk. Measuring specific biomarkers, primarily 
BNP or NT-proBNP, is recommended to confirm the presence/absence of CHF and to 
evaluate CHF severity in patients with these risk factors.
CONCLUSION: A combination of COPD and CHF produces a number of clinical and, 
specifically, diagnostic problems, which have not been completely solved so far.

DOI: 10.18087/cardio.2486
PMID: 30853013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. FP Essent. 2019 Nov;486:26-32.

Respiratory Conditions: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Barstow C(1), Forbes D(1).

Author information:
(1)Womack Army Medical Center, 2817 Reilly Road Fort Bragg, NC 28310-7301.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive respiratory 
disease characterized by cough, dyspnea, and sputum production caused by 
inhalation of harmful chemicals, such as tobacco smoke. COPD should be suspected 
in patients with a significant smoking history, shortness of breath, and sputum 
production. The diagnosis is made by spirometry. A forced expiratory volume in 
the first second of expiration to forced vital capacity (FEV1/FVC) ratio of less 
than 0.7 after bronchodilator administration confirms the diagnosis. Therapy for 
patients with stable COPD should include a bronchodilator, either a long-acting 
beta2-agonist (LABA) or a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA). For patients 
who continue to experience dyspnea with a single bronchodilator, dual therapy 
with a LABA and LAMA is appropriate. For patients with continued exacerbations, 
inhaled corticosteroids can be added to LABA-LAMA therapy. Acute exacerbations 
are characterized by a worsening of symptoms that requires additional therapy. 
Short-acting beta2-agonists with or without short-acting muscarinic antagonists 
are the basic therapy for acute exacerbations of COPD. Systemic glucocorticoids 
have been shown to shorten exacerbations and improve lung function. Antibiotics 
have been shown to reduce rates of treatment failure and sputum purulence. 
Noninvasive mechanical ventilation is preferred for patients with respiratory 
failure.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 31710455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 28;14:531-546. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S196383. eCollection 2019.

Extrafine triple therapy delays COPD clinically important deterioration vs 
ICS/LABA, LAMA, or LABA/LAMA.

Singh D(1), Fabbri LM(2)(3), Vezzoli S(4), Petruzzelli S(4), Papi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester University 
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK, dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(2)Section of Cardiorespiratory and Internal Medicine, Department of Medical 
Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)COPD Center, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Current pharmacological therapies for COPD improve quality of life 
and symptoms and reduce exacerbations. Given the progressive nature of COPD, it 
is arguably more important to understand whether the available therapies are 
able to delay clinical deterioration; the concept of "clinically important 
deterioration" (CID) has therefore been developed. We evaluated the efficacy of 
the single-inhaler triple combination beclometasone dipropionate, formoterol 
fumarate, and glycopyrronium (BDP/FF/G), using data from three large 1-year 
studies.
METHODS: The studies compared BDP/FF/G to BDP/FF (TRILOGY), tiotropium 
(TRINITY), and indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY; TRIBUTE). All studies 
recruited patients with symptomatic COPD, FEV1 <50%, and an exacerbation 
history. We measured the time to first CID and to sustained CID, an endpoint 
combining FEV1, St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), moderate-to-severe 
exacerbations, and death. The time to first CID was based on the first 
occurrence of any of the following: a decrease of ≥100 mL from baseline in FEV1, 
an increase of ≥4 units from baseline in SGRQ total score, the occurrence of a 
moderate/severe COPD exacerbation, or death. The time to sustained CID was 
defined as: a CID in FEV1 and/or SGRQ total score maintained at all subsequent 
visits, an exacerbation, or death.
RESULTS: Extrafine BDP/FF/G significantly extended the time to first CID vs 
BDP/FF (HR 0.61, P<0.001), tiotropium (0.72, P<0.001), and IND/GLY (0.82, 
P<0.001), and significantly extended the time to sustained CID vs BDP/FF (HR 
0.64, P<0.001) and tiotropium (0.80, P<0.001), with a numerical extension vs 
IND/GLY.
CONCLUSION: In patients with symptomatic COPD, FEV1 <50%, and an exacerbation 
history, extrafine BDP/FF/G delayed disease deterioration compared with BDP/FF, 
tiotropium, and IND/GLY.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The studies are registered in ClinicalTrials.gov: TRILOGY, 
NCT01917331; TRINITY, NCT01911364; TRIBUTE, NCT02579850.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S196383
PMCID: PMC6400232
PMID: 30880943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure DS is supported by the National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Manchester Biomedical Research Centre 
(BRC). DS received personal fees from Chiesi during the conduct of these 
studies. Outside the submitted work, DS reports grants and personal fees from 
Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, 
Johnson and Johnson, Merck, NAPP, Novartis, Pfizer, Takeda, Teva, Theravance, 
and Verona, and personal fees from Genentech and Skyepharma. LMF reports grants, 
personal fees, and non-financial support from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi 
Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Takeda, AstraZeneca, 
Novartis, Menarini, Laboratori Guidotti, and Almirall; personal fees and 
non-financial support from Pearl Therapeutics, Mundipharma, and Boston 
Scientific; personal fees from Kyorin, Bayer, and Zambon; and grants from 
Pfizer, Dompè, Malesci, Alfasigma, and Vree Health Italia, all outside the 
submitted work. SV and SP are employed by Chiesi, the sponsor of the studies. AP 
reports grants, personal fees, non-financial support, and advisory board 
membership from Chiesi, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Mundipharma, and TEVA; personal fees and non-financial support from Menarini, 
Novartis, and Zambon; and grants from Sanofi, all outside the submitted work. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


8. Chest. 2019 Jun;155(6):1158-1165. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.03.005. Epub 2019 
Mar 26.

Comparative Effectiveness and Safety of LABA-LAMA vs LABA-ICS Treatment of COPD 
in Real-World Clinical Practice.

Suissa S(1), Dell'Aniello S(2), Ernst P(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General 
Hospital, and the Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Occupational 
Health, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. Electronic address: 
samy.suissa@mcgill.ca.
(2)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General 
Hospital, and the Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Occupational 
Health, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Chest. 2019 Aug;156(2):415-416.
    Chest. 2019 Aug;156(2):416-417.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) and long-acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMAs) are recommended as initial maintenance treatments for COPD, 
with their combination (LABA-LAMA) advocated as the disease progresses. 
Randomized trials comparing the effectiveness of this combination with the 
alternative combination of LABA with inhaled corticosteroid (LABA-ICS) have 
reported conflicting data, while there are no real-world comparative 
effectiveness and safety studies of these regimens in clinical practice 
settings.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of patients with COPD during 2002-2015, age 55 
years or older, from the United Kingdom's Clinical Practice Research Datalink. 
Patients initiating LABA-LAMA on the same day (no ICS) were matched on 
time-conditional high-dimensional propensity scores with patients initiating 
LABA-ICS on the same day (no LAMA), and monitored for 1 year for the occurrence 
of a moderate or severe COPD exacerbation and severe pneumonia.
RESULTS: The cohort included 1,977 initiators of LABA-LAMA matched with 1,977 
initiators of LABA-ICS. The hazard ratio (HR) of moderate or severe COPD 
exacerbation associated with LABA-LAMA initiation, relative to LABA-ICS 
initiation, was 1.04 (95% CI, 0.90-1.20), while for a severe exacerbation it was 
0.94 (95% CI, 0.65-1.36). The incidence of severe pneumonia requiring 
hospitalization was lower with LABA-LAMA initiation (HR, 0.66; 95% CI, 
0.41-1.05), particularly in the on-treatment analysis (HR, 0.66; 95% CI, 
0.50-0.87).
CONCLUSIONS: In a real-world clinical practice setting of COPD treatment, 
combined LABA-LAMA inhalers appear to be as effective as combined LABA-ICS 
inhalers in preventing COPD exacerbations. However, a LABA-LAMA combination may 
be preferred because it is associated with fewer severe pneumonias.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.03.005
PMID: 30922950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. JAMA. 2019 Feb 26;321(8):786-797. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.0131.

Diagnosis and Outpatient Management of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A 
Review.

Riley CM(1), Sciurba FC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Department of Medicine, Allergy and Critical Care 
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

IMPORTANCE: There are 30 million adults (12%) in the United States who have 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease accounts for 3.2% of all physician office visits annually and is the 
fourth leading cause of death (126 000 deaths per year). Most patients are 
diagnosed by their primary care clinicians who must address the highly variable 
clinical features and responses to therapy. The diagnosis and treatment of COPD 
is rapidly changing, so understanding recent advances is important for the 
delivery of optimal patient care.
OBSERVATIONS: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is characterized by 
incompletely reversible expiratory airflow limitation. Spirometry is the 
reference standard for diagnosing and assessing the severity of COPD. All 
patients should be counseled about and receive preventive measures such as 
smoking cessation and vaccination. Treatment should be guided by the severity of 
lung impairment, symptoms such as dyspnea, the amount of cough and sputum 
production, and how often a patient experiences an exacerbation. When dyspnea 
limits activity or quality of life, COPD should be treated with once- or 
twice-daily maintenance long-acting anticholinergic and β-agonist 
bronchodilators. Patients with acute exacerbations may benefit from the addition 
of inhaled corticosteroids, particularly those with elevated peripheral 
eosinophil levels. Pulmonary rehabilitation, which includes strength and 
endurance training and educational, nutritional, and psychosocial support, 
improves symptoms and exercise tolerance but is underutilized. Supplemental 
oxygen for patients with resting hypoxemia (defined as Spo2 <89%) improves 
survival.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a 
complicated disease requiring intensive treatment. Appropriate use of 
long-acting maintenance bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids, and pulmonary 
rehabilitation decreases symptoms, optimizes functional performance, and reduces 
exacerbation frequency. Supplemental oxygen in patients with resting hypoxemia 
prolongs life, and other advanced treatments are available based on specific 
patient characteristics.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2019.0131
PMID: 30806700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Respir Res. 2019 Mar 28;20(1):62. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1029-7.

Change in inhaled corticosteroid treatment and COPD exacerbations: an analysis 
of real-world data from the KOLD/KOCOSS cohorts.

Lee SH(1), Lee JH(2), Yoon HI(3), Park HY(4), Kim TH(5), Yoo KH(6), Oh YM(1), 
Jung KS(7), Lee SD(1), Lee SW(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, 
Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul National 
University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Hanyang University Guri 
Hospital, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Guri, Republic of Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(7)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Hallym University 
Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University Medical School, Anyang, Republic of 
Korea.
(8)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
seiwon@amc.seoul.kr.

BACKGROUND: This cohort study of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) was performed to evaluate the status of inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS) prescriptions following the 2017 revision of the Global Initiative for 
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease guidelines.
METHODS: A total of 1144 patients from the Korean Obstructive Lung Disease and 
Korea Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disorders Subgroup Study cohorts, with final 
follow-up visits completed between 2017 and 2018, were analyzed. Features 
indicative of ICS usage were as follows: a history of asthma, blood eosinophils 
of ≥300 cells/μl, or ≥ 2 exacerbations in the year prior to enrollment. Among 
baseline ICS users, we compared annual total and severe exacerbation rates, 
based on ICS continuation or withdrawal.
RESULTS: ICS-containing regimens were prescribed to 46.3% of the enrolled of 
patients in 2014; this decreased to 38.8% in 2017, and long-acting dual 
bronchodilators were used instead. Among ICS users in 2017, 47.5% did not 
exhibit features indicative of ICS usage; 478 used ICS at baseline, and ICS was 
withdrawn in 77 (16.1%) during the study period. The proportion of patients with 
asthma and the baseline annual exacerbation rate were greater in the ICS 
withdrawal groinup than in the ICS continued group (56.6% vs. 41%, p = 0.01; 
0.79 vs. 0.53, p < 0.001). Annual exacerbation rates during the follow-up period 
were similar between the ICS-withdrawal and ICS -continued groups (0.48 vs. 
0.47, p = 0.84); however, former exhibited a significantly higher rate of severe 
exacerbation (0.22 vs. 0.12, p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Prescriptions of ICS to treat COPD decreased with increased use of 
long-acting dual bronchodilators. ICS withdrawal might impact severe 
exacerbation; the potential risks and benefits of withdrawing ICS should 
therefore be considered based on patients' characteristics.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1029-7
PMCID: PMC6437901
PMID: 30922302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Written informed consent was obtained from all the patients who were enrolled in 
accordance with the Helsinki Declaration, and the study was approved by each 
Institutional Review Board of the participating hospitals. CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: Written informed consent for publication of patient clinical 
details was obtained from each patient. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare 
that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


11. Rev Diabet Stud. 2019 Feb 25;15:1-15. doi: 10.1900/RDS.2019.15.1.

Diabetes and Lung Disease: A Neglected Relationship.

Khateeb J(1), Fuchs E(2), Khamaisi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine D, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Pulmonary Division, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus is a systemic disorder associated with 
inflammation and oxidative stress which may target many organs such as the 
kidney, retina, and the vascular system. The pathophysiology, mechanisms, and 
consequences of diabetes on these organs have been studied widely. However, no 
work has been done on the concept of the lung as a target organ for diabetes and 
its implications for lung diseases.
AIM: In this review, we aimed to investigate the effects of diabetes and 
hypoglycemic agent on lung diseases, including asthma, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension, 
and lung cancer. We also reviewed the potential mechanisms by which these 
effects may affect lung disease patients.
RESULTS: Our results suggest that diabetes can affect the severity and clinical 
course of several lung diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the diabetes-lung association is epidemiologically and 
clinically well-established, especially in asthma, the underlying mechanism and 
pathophysiology are not been fully understood. Several mechanisms have been 
suggested, mainly associated with the pro-inflammatory and proliferative 
properties of diabetes, but also in relation to micro- and macrovascular effects 
of diabetes on the pulmonary vasculature. Also, hypoglycemic drugs may influence 
lung diseases in different ways. For example, metformin was considered a 
potential therapeutic agent in lung diseases, while insulin was shown to 
exacerbate lung diseases; this suggests that their effects extend beyond their 
hypoglycemic properties.

DOI: 10.1900/RDS.2019.15.1
PMCID: PMC6760893
PMID: 30489598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interests.


12. Respir Res. 2019 Nov 4;20(1):242. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1213-9.

Single-inhaler triple therapy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: a systematic review.

Langham S(1), Lewis J(2), Pooley N(2), Embleton N(2), Langham J(2), Han MK(3), 
Chalmers JD(4).

Author information:
(1)Maverex Limited, Manchester, UK. suelangham@maverex.com.
(2)Maverex Limited, Manchester, UK.
(3)University of Michigan, Women's Respiratory Clinic, Ann Arbor, USA.
(4)University of Dundee and Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK.

BACKGROUND: Guidelines recommend that treatment with a long-acting β2 agonist 
(LABA), a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), and inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS), i.e. triple therapy, is reserved for a select group of symptomatic 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who continue to 
exacerbate despite treatment with dual therapy (LABA/LAMA). A number of 
single-inhaler triple therapies are now available and important clinical 
questions remain over their role in the patient pathway. We compared the 
efficacy and safety of single-inhaler triple therapy to assess the magnitude of 
benefit and to identify patients with the best risk-benefit profile for 
treatment. We also evaluated and compared study designs and population 
characteristics to assess the strength of the evidence base.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic search, from inception to December 2018, of 
randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of single-inhaler triple therapy in patients 
with COPD. The primary outcome was the annual rate of moderate and severe 
exacerbations.
RESULTS: We identified 523 records, of which 15 reports/abstracts from six RCTs 
were included. Triple therapy resulted in the reduction of the annual rate of 
moderate or severe exacerbations in the range of 15-52% compared with LAMA/LABA, 
15-35% compared to LABA/ICS and 20% compared to LAMA. The patient-based number 
needed to treat for the moderate or severe exacerbation outcome ranged between 
approximately 25-50 (preventing one patient from having an event) and the 
event-based number needed to treat of around 3-11 (preventing one event). The 
absolute benefit appeared to be greater in patients with higher eosinophil 
counts or historical frequency of exacerbations and ex-smokers. In the largest 
study, there was a significantly higher incidence of pneumonia in the triple 
therapy arm. There were important differences in study designs and populations 
impacting the interpretation of the results and indicating there would be 
significant heterogeneity in cross-trial comparisons.
CONCLUSION: The decision to prescribe triple therapy should consider patient 
phenotype, magnitude of benefit and increased risk of adverse events. Future 
research on specific patient phenotype thresholds that can support treatment and 
funding decisions is now required from well-designed, robust, clinical trials.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: PROSPERO #CRD42018102125 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1213-9
PMCID: PMC6829989
PMID: 31684965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SL, JLe, NP, NE, and JLa report personal fees 
from Boehringer Ingelheim during the conduct of the study and outside the 
submitted work. MKH reports consulting for Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca and Mylan as well as research support from Novartis 
and Sunovion. JDC reports grants and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Grifols and Gilead Sciences outside the submitted 
work. The authors have no financial relationships with any organisations, or 
other relationships or activities, that might have influenced the submitted work 
in the previous three years.


13. Chest. 2019 Apr;155(4):758-770. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.12.016. Epub 2019 Jan 
17.

Adding a LAMA to ICS/LABA Therapy: A Meta-analysis of Triple Combination Therapy 
in COPD.

Calzetta L(1), Cazzola M(2), Matera MG(3), Rogliani P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata," Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Unit of Respiratory Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata," Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine (Dr Matera), Unit of Pharmacology, 
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli," Naples, Italy.

Comment in
    Chest. 2019 May;155(5):1078-1079.
    Chest. 2019 May;155(5):1079-1080.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) 
combination is commonly prescribed to treat COPD; therefore, we performed a 
meta-analysis on the effect of adding a long-acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonist (LAMA) to ICS/LABA combination in COPD.
METHODS: Studies were identified by searching in different databases the 
randomized controlled trials that investigated the effect of ICS/LABA/LAMA 
combination in COPD. The primary end points were the effect of triple therapy on 
trough FEV1, risk of acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD), and risk of 
cardiovascular serious adverse events (SAEs), compared with ICS/LABA 
combination. The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and 
Evaluation system was used to assess the quality of evidence.
RESULTS: Thirteen randomized controlled trials including 15,519 patients with 
COPD (ICS/LABA/LAMA combination, 53.1%; ICS/LABA combination, 46.9%) were 
meta-analyzed. ICS/LABA/LAMA combination improved trough FEV1 (mean 
difference, +104.86 mL; 95% CI, 86.74-122.99; high quality of evidence) and 
protected against AECOPD (relative risk, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.71-0.85; high quality 
of evidence) vs ICS/LABA combination. For every approximately four patients 
treated with triple therapy, one increased FEV1 > 100 mL, and approximately 26 
patients had to be treated for 1 year with ICS/LABA/LAMA combination to prevent 
one AECOPD, compared with ICS/LABA combination. Adding a LAMA to ICS/LABA 
therapy did not modulate the risk of cardiovascular SAEs (moderate quality of 
evidence).
CONCLUSIONS: Triple therapy provides significant clinical benefit in patients 
with COPD on ICS/LABA combination. ICS/LABA therapy can be escalated to triple 
therapy without a real risk to increase cardiovascular SAEs when a LAMA is added 
to the combination.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: CRD42018095300; URL: 
www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.12.016
PMID: 30660781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Clin Respir J. 2019 Jul;13(7):413-428. doi: 10.1111/crj.13026. Epub 2019 May 2.

Triple versus dual inhaler therapy in moderate-to-severe COPD: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Zayed Y(1), Barbarawi M(1), Kheiri B(1), Haykal T(1), Chahine A(1), Rashdan 
L(1), Hamid K(1), Sundus S(1), Banifadel M(2), Aburahma A(1), Bachuwa G(1), 
Chandran A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hurley Medical Center, Michigan State 
University, Flint, Michigan.
(2)Internal Medicine Department, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio.
(3)Pulmonary and Critical Care Department, Hurley Medical Center, Michigan State 
University, Flint, Michigan.

INTRODUCTION: Treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is 
evolving specially with triple inhaler therapy.
OBJECTIVES: To perform a meta-analysis to ascertain the safety and efficacy of 
triple inhaler therapy consisting of an inhaled-glucocorticoid (ICS), 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA) 
when compared with dual therapy (ICS-LABA or LAMA-LABA).
METHODS: We performed an electronic database search to include randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) comparing between triple and dual inhalers. Pooled 
rate-ratio (RR) or odds-ratio (OR) for dichotomous data and weighted mean 
difference (MD) for continuous data were calculated with their corresponding 95% 
confidence interval (CI).
RESULTS: Our study included 12 RCTs totaling 19,322 patients, mean age of 
65 ± 8.2 years and 68.2% were male. Pooled analysis demonstrated a significant 
reduction in moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbations with triple therapy (RR 0.75; 
95% CI 0.69-0.83; P < 0.01). Additionally, triple therapy caused significant 
increase in trough FEV1 (MD 0.09 L; 95% CI 0.07-0.12; P < 0.01), significant 
reduction in the mean St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) score (MD 
-1.67; 95% CI -2.02- -1.31; P < 0.01), and more patients experienced ≥ 4 points 
reduction of SGRQ score (OR 1.27; 95% CI 1.19-1.35; P < 0.01). Triple therapy 
was associated with an increased risk of pneumonia when compared to LABA/LAMA 
(OR 1.25; 95% 1.03-1.97; P = 0.03) but there were no significant differences in 
other adverse events between triple and dual inhalers.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, triple inhaler therapy 
was associated with a reduction of moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbations, 
improved lung function and improved quality of life when compared to dual 
inhaler therapy but with an increased pneumonia risk.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13026
PMID: 30947394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 4;14:353-360. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S176662. eCollection 2019.

Early management of COPD: where are we now and where do we go from here? A 
Delphi consensus project.

Di Marco F(1), Balbo P(2), de Blasio F(3), Cardaci V(4), Crimi N(5), Girbino 
G(6), Pelaia G(7), Pirina P(8), Roversi P(9), Santus P(10)(11), Scichilone 
N(12), Vatrella A(13), Pasqualetti P(14), Carone M(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Respiratory Unit, Papa 
Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy, fabiano.dimarco@unimi.it.
(2)SC Malattie dell'Apparato Respiratorio, AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, 
Italy.
(3)Respiratory Medicine and Pulmonary Rehabilitation Section, Clinic Center 
S.p.A. Private Hospital, Department of Medicine and Health Sciences "V Tiberio", 
University of Molise, Campobasso, Italy.
(4)Unit of Pulmonary Rehabilitation, IRCCS "San Raffaele Pisana", Rome, Italy.
(5)Unità Operativa Complessa di Pneumologia e Allergologia, Policlinico Rodolico 
Vittorio Emanuele, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy.
(6)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Odontoiatriche e delle Immagini 
Morfologiche e Funzionali (BIOMORF), Università degli Studi di Messina, Messina, 
Italy.
(7)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Unit of Respiratory Diseases, 
University Magna Graecia of Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.
(8)Respiratory Unit, AOU Sassari, Sassari, Italy.
(9)Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, Policlinico di Modena, Modena, Italy.
(10)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.
(11)Division of Respiratory Diseases "L. Sacco" Hospital, ASST Fatebenefratelli 
Sacco, Milan, Italy.
(12)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica (DIBIMIS), 
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(13)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry "Scuola Medica Salernitana", 
University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.
(14)Fondazione Fatebenefratelli per la Ricerca e la Formazione Sanitaria e 
Sociale, Rome, Italy.
(15)Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri, IRCCS di Cassano delle Murge, Cassano 
delle Murge (BA), Italy.

PURPOSE: There is a lack of consensus on the most appropriate early diagnostic 
strategy, criteria for early access to treatment and follow-up approach for 
patients with COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A Delphi consensus project investigated the early 
management of COPD. We formulated two questionnaires for completion by 
pneumologists in Italy.
RESULTS: A total of 207 specialists completed questionnaire 1 and 184 of them 
questionnaire 2, between November 2016 and October 2017. Early diagnosis of COPD 
was considered uncommon for 93.2% of the expert panel. Regardless of the 
definition of "early diagnosis" - a diagnosis made before the clinical 
manifestation of the disease for most responders (60.4%) - experts were 
confident of the positive effects of early disease management, which they 
consider is effective in modifying the natural history of the disease. Lack of 
awareness of the disease was considered the first limiting factor to early COPD 
management for 78% of respondents. The most effective steps to reduce functional 
decline were considered to be smoking cessation, followed by long-acting 
β2-agonist (LABA)/long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), LAMA, LABA, and 
finally inhaled corticosteroid/LABA (P<0.01 for each paired comparison). 
Specialists considered it "inappropriate" for general practitioners to perform 
both the early diagnosis and therapy of COPD without the involvement of a 
specialist.
CONCLUSION: Early management of COPD is uncommon, and although data on the 
effects of early disease management on long-term outcomes are limited, Italian 
experts are confident of the clinical efficacy of this approach.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S176662
PMCID: PMC6366359
PMID: 30787604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr. Di Marco has received honoraria 
for lectures at national and international meetings from Almirall, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Dompe, Guidotti/Malesci, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini, Novartis, and Zambon. He has served as a consultant 
for AstraZeneca, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Novartis, and Zambon. He has received 
financial support for research from Novartis and Boehringer Ingelheim. Prof. Dr. 
de Blasio has served as a consultant for AstraZeneca, and Dr. Santus has served 
as a consultant for AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Zambon Italia, Guiodotti, 
GSK, and Chiesi Farmaceutici. The authors report no other conflicts of interest 
in this work.


16. Respir Res. 2019 Aug 20;20(1):189. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1156-1.

Are there specific clinical characteristics associated with physician's 
treatment choices in COPD?

Roche N(1)(2), Antoniadis A(3), Hess D(4), Li PZ(5), Kelkel E(6), Leroy S(7)(8), 
Pison C(9), Burgel PR(10), Aguilaniu B(11); COLIBRI COPD Research Group.

Author information:
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Centre, Hôpital Cochin, 
AP-HP and Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75014, Paris, France. 
nicolas.roche@aphp.fr.
(2)Pneumologie et Soins Intensifs Respiratoires, Hôpital Cochin, 27, rue du Fbg 
St Jacques, 75014, Paris, France. nicolas.roche@aphp.fr.
(3)Laboratoire LJK, Département de statistiques, Université Grenoble Alpes, 
Grenoble, France.
(4)Programme Colibri-Pneumo, ACCPP (Association pour la Complémentarité des 
Connaissances et des Pratiques de la Pneumologie), Grenoble, France.
(5)Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit, Montreal Chest 
Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
(6)Service de pneumologie, Pôle médecines spécialisées et cancérologie, Centre 
hospitalier général, Chambéry, France.
(7)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Oncology, CHU de Nice, University 
Hospital Federation OncoAge, Nice, France.
(8)CNRS UMR 7275 - Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 
Université de Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France.
(9)Service Hospitalier Universitaire Pneumologie Physiologie, Pôle Thorax et 
Vaisseaux, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Grenoble Alpes, Inserm 1055, 
Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.
(10)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Centre, Hôpital 
Cochin, AP-HP and Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75014, Paris, 
France.
(11)Université Grenoble Alpes and Programme Colibri-Pneumo (aCCPP), Grenoble, 
France.

BACKGROUND: The number of pharmacological agents and guidelines available for 
COPD has increased markedly but guidelines remain poorly followed. Understanding 
underlying clinical reasoning is challenging and could be informed by clinical 
characteristics associated with treatment prescriptions.
METHODS: To determine whether COPD treatment choices by respiratory physicians 
correspond to specific patients' features, this study was performed in 1171 
patients who had complete treatment and clinical characterisation data. Multiple 
statistical models were applied to explain five treatment categories: A: no COPD 
treatment or short-acting bronchodilator(s) only; B: one long-acting 
bronchodilator (beta2 agonist, LABA or anticholinergic agent, LAMA); C: 
LABA+LAMA; D: a LABA or LAMA + inhaled corticosteroid (ICS); E: triple therapy 
(LABA+LAMA+ICS).
RESULTS: Mean FEV1 was 60% predicted. Triple therapy was prescribed to 32.9% 
(treatment category E) of patients and 29.8% received a combination of two 
treatments (treatment categories C or D); ICS-containing regimen were present 
for 44% of patients altogether. Single or dual bronchodilation were less 
frequently used (treatment categories B and C: 19% each). While lung function 
was associated with all treatment decisions, exacerbation history, scores of 
clinical impact and gender were associated with the prescription of > 1 
maintenance treatment. Statistical models could predict treatment decisions with 
a < 35% error rate.
CONCLUSION: In COPD, contrary to what has been previously reported in some 
studies, treatment choices by respiratory physicians appear rather rational 
since they can be largely explained by the patients' characteristics proposed to 
guide them in most recommendations.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1156-1
PMCID: PMC6701115
PMID: 31429756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NR reports grants and personal fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Pfizer and personal fees from Teva, GSK, 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Mundipharma, Cipla, Sanofi, Sandoz, 3 M, Zambon. PRB 
reports personal fees from Astra-Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim France, Chiesi, 
GSK, Novartis, Pfizer, Vertex, Zambon, Teva. CP reports grants and personal fees 
from GSK France, personal fees from Novartis France, BIF and AZ France. AA, BA, 
EK, SL have nothing to disclose. DH is employed by Association pour la 
Complémentarité des Connaissances et des Pratiques de la Pneumologie, Grenoble 
using funds from Agir à Dom, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, 
Novartis, PneumRx.


17. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2019 Apr;20(6):737-750. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2019.1570133. Epub 2019 Feb 1.

Inhaled therapies and cardiovascular risk in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Rogliani P(1)(2), Calzetta L(1), Matera MG(3), di Daniele N(4), Girolami A(1), 
Cazzola M(1), Ora J(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Experimental Medicine , University of Rome "Tor Vergata" , 
Rome , Italy.
(2)b Division of Respiratory Medicine , University Hospital "Tor Vergata" , Rome 
, Italy.
(3)c Department of Experimental Medicine , University of Campania Luigi 
Vanvitelli , Naples , Italy.
(4)d Department of Systems Medicine , University of Rome "Tor Vergata" , Rome , 
Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) therapy includes a 
multi-dimensional approach, taking into account both symptoms of the patient and 
the number of acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPDs). There are three main 
pharmaceutical classes currently available including long-acting muscarinic 
antagonists (LAMA), long-acting β2-agonists (LABA) and inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS). COPD is a major risk factor for most cardiovascular diseases, and cardiac 
comorbidities are very common in COPD patients. Both LAMA and LABA have a 
considerable impact on cardiac function by stimulating cardiac β2-adrenergic 
receptors or inhibiting the heart M2 muscarinic receptors. ICS alone or in 
combination has never been associated with a real cardiovascular risk.
AREAS COVERED: This review explores the data published on the safety of COPD 
therapy and the implications for current pharmacotherapy.
EXPERT OPINION: Several studies have confirmed the good safety profile of 
bronchodilators available both in monotherapy and in association with other 
bronchodilators of different classes or with ICS despite the device used. 
Cardiovascular events in clinical trials are generally low and balanced between 
groups. The actual cardiovascular risk of fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) in an 
unselected COPD population will need to be investigated through post-marketing 
surveillance studies and observational studies.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2019.1570133
PMID: 30707637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2019 Apr;12(4):293-298. doi: 
10.1080/17512433.2019.1587292. Epub 2019 Mar 22.

Revefenacin for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Li F(1), Yang J(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Endocrinology , Central Hospital of Linyi City , Yishui 
Shandong , China.
(2)b Department of Pharmaceutical , Central Hospital of Linyi City , Yishui , 
Shandong , China.

Acetylcholine is the predominant parasympathetic neurotransmitter in the 
airways, and plays a key role in the pathophysiology of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Muscarinic receptors are found in smooth muscle cells 
and submucosal glands. Binding of acetylcholine to muscarinic receptors could 
trigger bronchoconstriction. Muscarinic antagonists prevent acetylcholine from 
binding to its receptors and produce bronchodilation. Revefenacin is the first 
once-daily dosed nebulized long-acting muscarinic antagonist indicated for the 
maintenance treatment of patients with COPD. Areas covered: In this paper, the 
chemical properties, mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy 
and safety of Revefenacin was introduced, and the evolution of muscarinic 
antagonists is also briefly described. Expert commentary: Revefenacin is a new 
M3 muscarinic receptor antagonist, which could prevent acetylcholine from 
binding with the muscarinic receptor, making bronchodilation and relieving COPD 
symptoms. Revefenacin has a rapid onset of action, and the curative effect is to 
maintain a long time. Clinical trials showed that Revefenacin could 
significantly increase forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) in patients with 
COPD and improve their quality of life. The recommended dose of Revefenacin 
inhalation solution is 175 μg once daily. Adverse reactions were mild and the 
drug was well tolerated.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2019.1587292
PMID: 30803279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Respir Med. 2019 Oct;157:1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.08.012. Epub 2019 Aug 21.

The lung microbiome dynamics between stability and exacerbation in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): Current perspectives.

Dima E(1), Kyriakoudi A(1), Kaponi M(1), Vasileiadis I(1), Stamou P(1), 
Koutsoukou A(1), Koulouris NG(1), Rovina N(2).

Author information:
(1)1th Department of Respiratory Medicine, Medical School, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens and "Sotiria" Chest Disease Hospital, 11527, 
Athens, Greece.
(2)1th Department of Respiratory Medicine, Medical School, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens and "Sotiria" Chest Disease Hospital, 11527, 
Athens, Greece. Electronic address: nikrovina@med.uoa.gr.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic inflammatory disorder 
with a course that is not uniform for all COPD patients. Although smoking is 
considered as the major cause of the disease, persistent or recurrent infections 
seem to play a particular role in the disease establishment and progression. 
COPD is characterized by dysregulated immunity that has been associated with the 
bacterial colonization and infections. The establishment of culture-independent 
techniques has shed new light on the relationships between bacterial ecology and 
health status and expanded our knowledge on the lung microbiome. Interactions 
between the host and lung microbiome result in inflammation and activation of 
resident cells. The lung microbiome contains populations of symbionts and 
pathobionts in balance which lose their equilibrium and disturb the balance of 
T-helper and regulatory T-cells (Treg) upon infection, or lung disease. In COPD 
factors such as disease severity, exacerbations, degree of inflammation, and 
type of treatment used (e.g inhaled or systemic steroids and antibiotics) affect 
the composition of lung microbiota. Recent data indicate that the presence of 
specific bacterial taxa in the airways has the potential to influence the host 
immune response and possibly to interfere with disease phenotype. Although, 
there is a growing body of evidence for the role of microbiome in COPD several 
unanswered questions still exist for its clinical relevance.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.08.012
PMID: 31450162


20. Respir Res. 2019 Aug 23;20(1):195. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1157-0.

Circulating neutrophils levels are a predictor of pneumonia risk in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Pascoe SJ(1), Papi A(2), Midwinter D(3), Lettis S(3), Barnes N(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Global Respiratory Clinical Development, GlaxoSmithKline plc., King of 
Prussia, USA. pascoesteve@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital St. Anna, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Clinical Statistics, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Uxbridge, UK.
(4)Global Respiratory Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Brentford, UK.
(5)William Harvey Institute Barts and the London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have 
excess risk of developing pneumonia; however, no definitive biomarkers of risk 
have been established. We hypothesized that blood neutrophils would help predict 
pneumonia risk in COPD.
METHODS: A meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind clinical trials of COPD 
patients meeting the following criteria were selected from the GlaxoSmithKline 
trial registry: ≥1 inhaled corticosteroid-containing (ICS) arm (fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol or fluticasone furoate/vilanterol), a control arm 
(non-ICS), pre-randomization blood neutrophil counts, ≥24-week duration. The 
number of patients with pneumonia events and time to first event (Kaplan-Meier 
analysis) were evaluated (post-hoc), stratified by baseline blood neutrophil 
count and ICS use. A Cox proportional hazards model was used to calculate hazard 
ratios (HR), split by median baseline blood neutrophils.
RESULTS: Ten studies (1998 to 2011) with 11,131 patients were identified. The 
ICS (n = 6735) and non-ICS (n = 4396) cohorts were well matched in neutrophil 
distributions and demographics. Increasing neutrophil count was associated with 
an increased proportion of patients with pneumonia events; patients below the 
median neutrophil count were at less risk of a pneumonia event (HR, 0.75 [95% 
confidence interval 0.61-0.92]), and had longer time to a first event, compared 
with those at/above the median. The increase in pneumonia risk by neutrophil 
count was similar between the two cohorts.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased blood neutrophils in COPD were associated with increased 
pneumonia risk, independent of ICS use. These data suggest blood neutrophils may 
be a useful marker in defining treatment pathways in COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1157-0
PMCID: PMC6708190
PMID: 31443653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SP, DM, SL, and NB are employees of, and hold 
stock in GlaxoSmithKline plc. AP reports grants, personal fees, and/or 
reimbursement of travel expenses from AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline plc., Menarini, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Mundipharma, Novartis, 
Teva, Sanofi, and Zambon.


21. Clin Respir J. 2019 Oct;13(10):643-651. doi: 10.1111/crj.13079. Epub 2019 Aug 
27.

Predictive factors for COPD exacerbations and mortality in patients with overlap 
syndrome.

Jaoude P(1)(2), El-Solh AA(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)The Veterans Affairs Western New York Healthcare System, Buffalo, New York.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Jacob School of Medicine, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Environmental Health, School of Public Health 
and Health Professions, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and 
obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA)-overlap syndrome-have a substantially greater 
risk of morbidity and mortality, compared to those with either COPD or OSA 
alone.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this retrospective study was to identify clinical 
modifiable factors associated with COPD exacerbations and all-cause mortality in 
patients with overlap syndrome.
METHODS: The electronic records of patients with simultaneous COPD and OSA who 
had a documented acute exacerbation of COPD during a 42-month period were 
evaluated for reviewed. A control group of overlap syndrome patients without 
exacerbations was matched 1:1 for age and body mass index. Vital status and 
cause of death were assessed through the population death registry.
RESULTS: Out of 225 eligible cases, 92 patients had at least one episode of COPD 
exacerbation. There was no significant association between severity of airflow 
limitation and apnoea hypopnea index (P = .31). After adjusting for confounding 
variables, patients who had at least one COPD exacerbation were more likely to 
be active smokers (P = .01), have poorer lung function (P = .001) and less 
likely to adhere to continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) use (P = .03). 
All-cause mortality was also correlated with low forced expiratory volume in 1 
second (P = .006), CPAP use (P = .007), and burden of comorbidities (P < .001).
CONCLUSION: Lung function and CPAP use were independent predictors of COPD 
exacerbations and all-cause mortality in a cohort of patients with overlap 
syndrome. These factors should be taken into account when considering the 
management and prognosis of these patients.

Published 2019. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13079
PMID: 31436034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Thorac Dis. 2019 Oct;11(Suppl 17):S2181-S2191. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2019.09.81.

Comprehensive care for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ko FWS(1), Chan KP(1), Hui DSC(1).

Author information:
(1)SH Ho Research Center in Respiratory Diseases, Department of Medicine and 
Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common chronic disease 
worldwide and incurs heavy utilization of healthcare resources. Many COPD 
patients have comorbidities and experience exacerbations in the course of the 
disease. Correct diagnosis and appropriate disease assessment are essential for 
clinical management. Comprehensive care for patients with different severity of 
disease aims to offer personalized treatment to suit individual needs. Patients 
with recent exacerbations also need extra care for the post-acute and 
rehabilitation phases. Comprehensive care consists of self-management and 
pulmonary rehabilitation and involves multiple healthcare providers working 
together closely to provide formal structured programmes for patients. The 
setting, professionals involved, content and the duration of programme vary a 
lot among different comprehensive care models. Some randomized controlled trials 
suggested there was improvement in quality of life, exercise capacity and 
reduced hospital admissions for participants in comprehensive care programmes 
compared with controls. However, other studies showed that such programmes might 
not confer benefits and might even bring harm. The reason for the differences in 
clinical effect of programmes might be due to differences in study design, 
components and subjects involved in the studies. Careful evaluation of each 
programme is thus mandatory. Further research is needed to evaluate the safety 
and effectiveness of comprehensive care management for COPD patients, both at 
the stable and post-acute exacerbation state.

2019 Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.09.81
PMCID: PMC6831924
PMID: 31737345

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.


23. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2019 Jan;13(1):5-11. doi: 10.1080/17476348.2019.1548937. 
Epub 2018 Nov 27.

Beclomethasone dipropionate, formoterol fumarate and glycopyrronium bromide as a 
combination therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kupczyk M(1), Kuna P(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Internal Medicine, Asthma and Allergy , Medical University of 
Lodz , Lodz , Poland.

The triple therapy term covers the combination of inhaled corticosteroid (ICS), 
long-acting β-receptor agonist (LABA) and long-acting anticholinergic drug 
(LAMA) in one or in separate inhalers. The latest GOLD 2018 (Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Disease) guidelines recommend the triple therapy in the 
management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in patients of group 
D who despite the combination of two drugs: LAMA/LABA or ICS/LABA continue to 
have persistent symptoms or suffer from further frequent exacerbations. Areas 
covered: The first triple fixed-dose combination of extrafine 
beclomethasone/formoterol/glycopyrronium in one pMDI type inhaler intended for 
the treatment of COPD has been registered in Europe in 2017. Pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic properties, clinical efficacy and safety of this triple 
combination are presented in the review. Expert commentary: A 20% reduction in 
the risk of moderate or severe exacerbation was found in patients receiving 
triple therapy compared to the ICS/LABA combination and LAMA monotherapy. Triple 
therapy reduces the number of exacerbations in comparison with double 
bronchodilatation (LABA/LAMA), thus representing an interesting therapeutic 
option in the management of COPD. The profile of side effects of triple therapy 
is typical for individual active agents included in the combination.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2019.1548937
PMID: 30463457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 18;14:249-260. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S185485. eCollection 2019.

Real-life effectiveness of indacaterol-glycopyrronium after switching from 
tiotropium or salmeterol/fluticasone therapy in patients with symptomatic COPD: 
the POWER study.

Kaplan A(1), Chapman KR(2), Anees SM(3), Mayers I(4), Rochdi D(5), Djandji M(5), 
Préfontaine D(5), McIvor A(6).

Author information:
(1)Family Physician Airways Group of Canada, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada, for4kids@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry - Western University, University of 
Windsor, ON, Canada.
(4)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc., Montreal, QC, Canada.
(6)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Firestone Institute for 
Respiratory Health, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

PURPOSE: In contrast to randomized controlled trials (RCTs), changes in 
maintenance pharmacotherapy in clinical practice occur without a washout period. 
The Prospective cohort study for the real-life effectiveness evaluation of 
glycOpyrronium With indacatERol combination in the management of COPD in Canada 
(POWER) study evaluated the real-life effectiveness of 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) following a direct switch from a 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA, tiotropium) or long-acting β2-agonist 
(LABA)/inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) maintenance treatment 
(salmeterol/fluticasone [SFC]).
METHODS: POWER was a single-cohort, prospective, multicenter, interventional 
study in which patients with moderate-to-severe COPD, who remained symptomatic 
on their current treatment of once-daily (od) tiotropium 18 µg or twice-daily 
(bid) SFC (any dose), were switched to treatment with open-label IND/GLY 110/50 
µg od for 16 weeks. Effectiveness end points were change from baseline in trough 
FEV1, transition dyspnea index (TDI) total scores, and COPD assessment test 
(CAT) scores at 16 weeks.
RESULTS: Trough FEV1 improved by 175 mL at Week 16 in patients who switched to 
IND/GLY. The change was 176 mL (95% CI: 135-217) when switched from tiotropium 
and 172 mL (95% CI: 85-258) when switched from SFC fixed-dose combination (FDC). 
At Week 16, significant improvements were observed in the mean TDI total scores 
(Δ=2.5) and CAT scores (Δ=-6.5) after the switch to IND/GLY treatment (both 
P<0.0001). Additionally, IND/GLY was well tolerated in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD, and no safety signal was observed.
CONCLUSION: In clinical practice settings, a direct switch from previous 
treatment with either tiotropium or SFC to IND/GLY was safe and provided 
superior clinically significant improvements in lung function and 
patient-related outcomes in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02202616.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S185485
PMCID: PMC6343749
PMID: 30718952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure AK reports nonfinancial support from 
Novartis, during the conduct of the study; personal fees from Novartis, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Teva, Pfizer, Sanofi, Purdue, and Paladdin; 
and grants and personal fees from Benton Dickinson, outside the submitted work. 
KRC reports grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca, grants and personal fees 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, grants from Baxter, grants and personal fees from CSL 
Behring, grants and personal fees from Grifols, grants from GlaxoSmithKline, 
grants and personal fees from Sanofi, grants and personal fees from Genentech, 
grants and personal fees from Kamada, grants from Amgen, grants and personal 
fees from Roche, grants and personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from 
Merck, and personal fees from CIHR-GSK Research Chair in Respiratory Health Care 
Deliveryat the University Health Network, during the conduct of the study. IM 
reports honoraria for continuing medical education related to COPD and asthma. 
DR is an employee of and reports personal fees from Novartis Pharmaceuticals 
Canada Inc. MD was a former employee of Novartis Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc. 
during this study. SMA reports clinical trial fees and speaking fees from 
Novartis. DP is an employee of and reports personal fees from Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc. DP also reports personal fees from Novartis Pharma 
AG, during the conduct of the study. AM reports honoraria for attending advisory 
boards and providing CME for AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and 
Takeda. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


25. Am J Manag Care. 2019 Apr;25(4):201-204.

Effect of changing COPD triple-therapy inhaler combinations on COPD symptoms.

Ladziak N(1), Albanese NP.

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona College of Pharmacy, 650 E Van Buren St, Office 3373, 
Phoenix, AZ 85004. Email: ladziak@pharmacy.arizona.edu.

OBJECTIVES: To determine if symptoms changed after changing chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) triple-therapy inhalers to a less expensive regimen.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective observational case-series analysis.
METHODS: A quality improvement program was instituted to reduce drug costs 
associated with COPD inhalers between fall 2016 and spring 2017. Patients 
identified as taking an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β agonist 
(LABA) inhaler and a long-acting muscarinic agonist (LAMA) inhaler were changed 
to a LAMA/LABA inhaler and an ICS inhaler. Symptoms were assessed at baseline 
and subsequent follow-up using the COPD Assessment Test (CAT), with lower scores 
representing better symptom control. Then, a retrospective observational 
case-series analysis of 118 patient charts was completed. The primary outcome 
was mean difference in CAT score. Data were analyzed using a paired t test with 
an α value of 0.05.
RESULTS: Of 118 patients included in the quality improvement program, 19 met the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria. The mean (SD) CAT score prior to the change 
was 15.53 (5.36), and the mean (SD) CAT score after the change was 14.68 (6.98). 
Symptom scores improved after the change, with an average difference in 
postchange and prechange CAT scores of -0.84, although this difference was not 
statistically significant (95% CI, -3.57 to 1.89; P = .525).
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the results of this observational review, changing COPD 
triple-therapy inhalers did not result in a significant change in 
patient-reported symptom scores. Patients may use triple-therapy inhalers that 
are most affordable without a significant change in symptom control.

PMID: 30986017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. F1000Res. 2019 Aug 29;8:F1000 Faculty Rev-1533. doi: 
10.12688/f1000research.19811.1. eCollection 2019.

Pharmacological treatment and current controversies in COPD.

Cazzola M(1), Rogliani P(1), Stolz D(2), Matera MG(3).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(2)Clinic of Respiratory Medicine and Pulmonary Cell Research, University 
Hospital of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.

Bronchodilators, corticosteroids, and antibiotics are still key elements for 
treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in the 2019 Global Initiative for 
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) recommendations and this is due in part 
to our current inability to discover new drugs capable of decisively influencing 
the course of the disease. However, in recent years, information has been 
produced that, if used correctly, can allow us to improve the use of the 
available therapies.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.19811.1
PMCID: PMC6719668
PMID: 31508197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MC has participated as a 
faculty member and advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the 
sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi 
Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, Lallemand, Menarini Group, Mundipharma, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Teva, Verona Pharma, and Zambon and is or has been a consultant to ABC 
Farmaceutici, AstraZeneca, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Edmond Pharma, Lallemand, 
Novartis, Ockham Biotech, Verona Pharma, and Zambon, and his department was 
funded by Almirall. DS has received research grants from the Swiss National 
Foundation, AstraZeneca AG, Pan Gas AG, Weinmann AG, Curetis AG, Boston 
Scientific AG, Circassia Pharmaceuticals, and Lungenliga Switzerland; received 
payment for lectures, advisory panels, or sponsorship to attend scientific 
meetings from Novartis AG, AstraZeneca AG, GSK AG, Roche AG, Zambon, Pfizer, and 
Schwabe Pharma AG; and is the current education council chair of the European 
Respiratory Society and immediate past president of the European Board for 
Accreditation in Pneumology and is the current GOLD representative for 
Switzerland. PR participated as a lecturer and advisor in scientific meetings 
and courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Biofutura, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Edmond Pharma, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Menarini Group, Mundipharma, and Novartis, and her department was funded by 
Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici Novartis, and Zambon. MGM 
has participated as a lecturer and advisor in scientific meetings and courses 
under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi 
Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis and has been a consultant to ABC 
Farmaceutici and Chiesi Farmaceutici, and her department was funded by Novartis, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Zambon.No competing interests were 
disclosed.No competing interests were disclosed.No competing interests were 
disclosed.


27. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Mar 6;3(3):CD012930. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD012930.pub2.

Once daily long-acting beta2-agonists and long-acting muscarinic antagonists in 
a combined inhaler versus placebo for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Maqsood U(1), Ho TN, Palmer K, Eccles FJ, Munavvar M, Wang R, Crossingham I, 
Evans DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sandwell and West Birmingham Hospitals 
NHS Trust, Birmingham, UK.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD012930.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a respiratory 
condition causing accumulation of mucus in the airways, cough, and 
breathlessness; the disease is progressive and is the fourth most common cause 
of death worldwide. Current treatment strategies for COPD are multi-modal and 
aim to reduce morbidity and mortality and increase patients' quality of life by 
slowing disease progression and preventing exacerbations. Fixed-dose 
combinations (FDCs) of a long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA) plus a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) delivered via a single inhaler are approved by 
regulatory authorities in the USA, Europe, and Japan for the treatment of COPD. 
Several LABA/LAMA FDCs are available and recent meta-analyses have clarified 
their utility versus their mono-components in COPD. Evaluation of the efficacy 
and safety of once-daily LABA/LAMA FDCs versus placebo will facilitate the 
comparison of different FDCs in future network meta-analyses.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed the evidence for once-daily LABA/LAMA combinations 
(delivered in a single inhaler) versus placebo on clinically meaningful outcomes 
in patients with stable COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified trials from Cochrane Airways' Specialised Register 
(CASR) and also conducted a search of the US National Institutes of Health 
Ongoing Trials Register ClinicalTrials.gov (www.clinicaltrials.gov) and the 
World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform 
(apps.who.int/trialsearch). We searched CASR and trial registries from their 
inception to 3 December 2018; we imposed no restriction on language of 
publication.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included parallel-group and cross-over randomised 
controlled trials (RCTs) comparing once-daily LABA/LAMA FDC versus placebo. We 
included studies reported as full-text, those published as abstract only, and 
unpublished data. We excluded very short-term trials with a duration of less 
than 3 weeks. We included adults (≥ 40 years old) with a diagnosis of stable 
COPD. We included studies that allowed participants to continue using their ICS 
during the trial as long as the ICS was not part of the randomised treatment.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently screened the 
search results to determine included studies, extracted data on prespecified 
outcomes of interest, and assessed the risk of bias of included studies; we 
resolved disagreements by discussion with a third review author. Where possible, 
we used a random-effects model to meta-analyse extracted data. We rated all 
outcomes using the GRADE (Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development and 
Evaluation) system and presented results in 'Summary of findings' tables.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified and included 22 RCTs randomly assigning 8641 people 
with COPD to either once-daily LABA/LAMA FDC (6252 participants) or placebo 
(3819 participants); nine studies had a cross-over design. Studies had a 
duration of between three and 52 weeks (median 12 weeks). The mean age of 
participants across the included studies ranged from 59 to 65 years and in 21 of 
22 studies, participants had GOLD stage II or III COPD. Concomitant inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) use was permitted in all of the included studies (where 
stated); across the included studies, between 28% to 58% of participants were 
using ICS at baseline. Six studies evaluated the once-daily combination of 
IND/GLY (110/50 μg), seven studies evaluated TIO/OLO (2.5/5 or 5/5 μg), eight 
studies evaluated UMEC/VI (62.5/5, 125/25 or 500/25 μg) and one study evaluated 
ACD/FOR (200/6, 200/12 or 200/18 μg); all LABA/LAMA combinations were compared 
with placebo.The risk of bias was generally considered to be low or unknown 
(insufficient detail provided), with only one study per domain considered to 
have a high risk of bias except for the domain 'other bias' which was determined 
to be at high risk of bias in four studies (in three studies, disease severity 
was greater at baseline in participants receiving LABA/LAMA compared with 
participants receiving placebo, which would be expected to shift the treatment 
effect in favour of placebo).Compared to the placebo, the pooled results for the 
primary outcomes for the once-daily LABA/LAMA arm were as follows: all-cause 
mortality, OR 1.88 (95% CI 0.81 to 4.36, low-certainty evidence); all-cause 
serious adverse events (SAEs), OR 1.06 (95% CI 0.88 to 1.28, high-certainty 
evidence); acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD), OR 0.53 (95% CI 0.36 to 0.78, 
moderate-certainty evidence); adjusted St George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) score, MD -4.08 (95% CI -4.80 to -3.36, high-certainty evidence); 
proportion of SGRQ responders, OR 1.75 (95% CI 1.54 to 1.99). Compared with 
placebo, the pooled results for the secondary outcomes for the once-daily 
LABA/LAMA arm were as follows: adjusted trough forced expiratory volume in one 
second (FEV1), MD 0.20 L (95% CI 0.19 to 0.21, moderate-certainty evidence); 
adjusted peak FEV1, MD 0.31 L (95% CI 0.29 to 0.32, moderate-certainty 
evidence); and all-cause AEs, OR 0.95 (95% CI 0.86 to 1.04; high-certainty 
evidence). No studies reported data for the 6-minute walk test. The results were 
generally consistent across subgroups for different LABA/LAMA combinations and 
doses.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Compared with placebo, once-daily LABA/LAMA (either 
IND/GLY, UMEC/VI or TIO/OLO) via a combination inhaler is associated with a 
clinically significant improvement in lung function and health-related quality 
of life in patients with mild-to-moderate COPD; UMEC/VI appears to reduce the 
rate of exacerbations in this population. These conclusions are supported by 
moderate or high certainty evidence based on studies with an observation period 
of up to one year.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012930.pub2
PMCID: PMC6402279
PMID: 30839102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: U Maqsood: none known. D Evans: provides 
freelance writing support to medical communications agencies. T Ho: none known. 
K Palmer: none known. F Eccles: none known. Ran Wang: none known. M Munavvar: 
Received honorarium for lectures and to attend the European Respiratory Society 
meeting, in the past, from various companies, including Astra Zeneca, Chiesi, 
GSK, Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Pneumrx. I Crossingham: none known.


28. Pulm Ther. 2019 Dec;5(2):117-126. doi: 10.1007/s41030-019-00102-8. Epub 2019 Nov 
2.

Triple Therapy Versus Dual Bronchodilation and Inhaled 
Corticosteroids/Long-Acting β-Agonists in COPD: Accumulating Evidence from 
Network Meta-Analyses.

Cazzola M(1), Calzetta L(2), Rogliani P(2), Matera MG(3).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. mario.cazzola@uniroma2.it.
(2)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(3)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.

Guidelines are mainly based on evidence of well-designed randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs), but there are limitations to the transferability of conclusions 
of RCTs to usual care mainly because the patients enrolled in RCTs are selected 
and not representative of the population encountered in daily practice; 
moreover, the research environment is substantially different from that of the 
real world. Because of the scarcity of data generated in large unselected 
populations in everyday clinical practice, the possibility of using 
meta-analyses can be considered. Recently, several meta-analyses have attempted 
to clarify the role of triple therapy containing a long-acting β-agonist (LABA), 
a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) and an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) 
delivered from a single inhaler in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
also considering that there is a big difference in the use of triple therapy 
between what is recommended by COPD guidelines or strategies and the 
prescriptive behaviour of clinicians. Taking into account the results of the 
most recent meta-analyses, we believe that triple therapy provides modest 
clinical benefit in the general COPD population, but in patients on LABA/LAMA 
combination therapy, who still experience acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPDs) 
and have blood eosinophil counts ≥ 300 cells·μl-1, it is of clinical relevance. 
On the contrary, adding a LAMA to an ICS/LABA combination elicits relevant 
clinical benefit in the general COPD population, supporting the role of dual 
bronchodilation therapy for the treatment of COPD. The quantitative synthesis of 
the currently available clinical evidence seems to suggest that, in patients 
with COPD already on ICS/LABA combination, the therapy can be improved without 
an increase of cardiovascular severe adverse events (SAEs) when a LAMA is added 
to the combination.

DOI: 10.1007/s41030-019-00102-8
PMCID: PMC6967256
PMID: 32026413


29. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 May 15;199(10):1195-1204. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201810-1860SO.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Biomarkers and Their Interpretation.

Stockley RA(1), Halpin DMG(2), Celli BR(3), Singh D(4).

Author information:
(1)1 Lung Investigation Unit, Medicine, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS 
Foundation Trust, Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, Birmingham, United 
Kingdom.
(2)2 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Exeter, 
United Kingdom.
(3)3 Pulmonary and Critical Care Department, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; and.
(4)4 Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester University 
NHS Foundation Hospital Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Jul 1;200(1):114.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Jul 1;200(1):114-115.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Sep 15;200(6):792.

The pathology and impact of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) results 
from an abnormal inflammatory process resulting in tissue damage with 
ineffective repair in response to toxic inhalants (especially cigarette smoke). 
Identification of mechanisms provides the opportunity to develop new therapies 
and a personalized approach to management. The collection of multiple genetic 
and detailed biochemical data from small and large patient cohorts has led to an 
explosion of studies investigating biomarkers to achieve these aims. Despite 
widespread enthusiasm and many statistically significant associations, the 
interpretation of COPD biomarker results requires thought and leaves many 
questions unanswered. The present review assesses the importance of these 
associations, whether they represent cause or effect, reflect disease severity 
or activity, the complexity of the pathway to the final pathogenic and hence 
interventional step, and problems with interpreting cross-sectional studies 
without knowing individual disease trajectories. The complexity of biomarker 
specificity without sufficient clinical phenotype and endotype information 
contributes to problems of interpretation. A strategic change is needed to 
develop useful COPD biomarkers; this includes focusing on endotype biomarkers 
within specific clinical phenotypes, biomarkers in early COPD, exacerbation 
subtype biomarkers, and biomarkers to predict or measure drug effects.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201810-1860SO
PMID: 30592902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Nov 29;14:2711-2723. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S217503. eCollection 2019.

Exacerbation Frequency And Eosinophil Counts Among Patients With COPD Currently 
Prescribed Triple Therapy.

Benson VS(1), Pascoe KC(1), Siddall J(2), Small M(2), Müllerová H(1).

Author information:
(1)GSK, Research and Development Uxbridge, Uxbridge, UK.
(2)Adelphi Real World, Adelphi Mill, Bollington, UK.

PURPOSE: To characterize and estimate the proportion of patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who continue to exacerbate while receiving 
triple therapy and further describe these patients according to blood eosinophil 
counts.
METHODS: This was an analysis of the 2017 Adelphi Real-World Respiratory Disease 
Specific Programme (DSP) survey of patients with COPD from France, Germany, 
Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom (UK). Demographics were assessed on the 
date of completion of the physician/patient questionnaire; clinical 
characteristics were captured for the previous 12 months. The proportion of 
patients receiving triple therapy, who had experienced ≥2 moderate or ≥1 severe 
acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD) in the 12 months prior to index, and had 
blood eosinophil counts ≥150 cells/µL (T-AECOPD-EOS150) or ≥300 cells/µL 
(T-AECOPD-EOS300), were calculated.
RESULTS: In total, 2876 patients were included of which 762 had an eosinophil 
value. A higher proportion of patients in the ≥300 cells/μL eosinophil group 
(55.9%) compared with 150-<300 cells/μL (48.7%) and <150 cells/μL (47.1%) groups 
experienced ≥2 moderate and/or ≥1 severe AECOPD in the year prior to index. The 
≥300 cells/μL eosinophil group had the lowest reported level of health-related 
quality of life (HRQoL). More severe disease in terms of comorbidities, lung 
function, healthcare resource use, and HRQoL was seen in patients with ≥2 
moderate or ≥1 severe AECOPD in the year prior to index while receiving triple 
therapy, compared with patients who did not meet these criteria. In total, 10.6% 
and 6.2% of the COPD population, respectively, met the criteria for the 
T-AECOPD-EOS150 and T-AECOPD-EOS300 cohorts.
CONCLUSION: This analysis demonstrates that there is a subpopulation of patients 
with COPD who continue to experience exacerbations despite receiving triple 
therapy; approximately three-quarters of these had eosinophils ≥150 cells/μL and 
one-third had eosinophils ≥300 cells/μL; these patients may benefit from 
eosinophil-targeted therapies.

© 2019 Benson et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S217503
PMCID: PMC6890196
PMID: 31819403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: VB is an employee at GSK and holds 
stocks/shares. KP and HM are former employees of GSK and hold stocks/shares. KP 
is currently employed at Janssen, High Wycombe, UK. HM is currently employed by 
AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK. MS and JS are full-time employees at Adelphi Real 
World, which received funding from GSK to perform this analysis. Employees of 
Adelphi Real World were not paid for manuscript development. The authors report 
no other conflicts of interest in this work.


31. Respir Med. 2019 Feb;147:58-65. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.12.016. Epub 2019 Jan 
10.

Benefit and safety of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol in the Salford Lung Study 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (SLS COPD) according to baseline 
patient characteristics and treatment subgroups.

Bakerly ND(1), Woodcock A(2), Collier S(3), Leather DA(4), New JP(5), Crawford 
J(6), Harvey C(7), Vestbo J(8), Boucot I(9).

Author information:
(1)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Stott Lane, Salford, M6 8HD, UK; Division 
of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, Manchester Academic Health 
Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, Oxford Rd, Manchester, M13 9PL, 
UK. Electronic address: nawar.bakerly@srft.nhs.uk.
(2)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, Manchester Academic 
Health Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, Oxford Rd, Manchester, M13 
9PL, UK; Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. Electronic 
address: ashley.woodcock@manchester.ac.uk.
(3)UK Medical, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Stockley Park West, 1-3 Ironbridge Road, 
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1BT, UK. Electronic address: sue.d.collier@gsk.com.
(4)Global Respiratory Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline plc., 980 Great West Rd, 
Brentford, Middlesex, TW8 9GS, UK. Electronic address: david.a.leather@gsk.com.
(5)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Stott Lane, Salford, M6 8HD, UK. 
Electronic address: john.p.new@manchester.ac.uk.
(6)Clinical Statistics, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Stockley Park West, 1-3 Ironbridge 
Road, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1BT, UK. Electronic address: 
jodie.v.crawford@gsk.com.
(7)Global Clinical Safety & Pharmacovigilance, Safety Evaluation and Risk 
Management, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Stockley Park West, 1-3 Ironbridge Road, 
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1BT, UK. Electronic address: cath_m_harvey@gsk.com.
(8)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, Manchester Academic 
Health Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, Oxford Rd, Manchester, M13 
9PL, UK; Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. Electronic 
address: Jorgen.Vestbo@manchester.ac.uk.
(9)Global Respiratory Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline plc., 980 Great West Rd, 
Brentford, Middlesex, TW8 9GS, UK. Electronic address: 
isabelle.i.boucot@gsk.com.

BACKGROUND: SLS COPD was the first open-label randomised controlled trial 
demonstrating a reduction in moderate/severe COPD exacerbations with once-daily 
inhaled fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI) in everyday clinical practice. 
Here we report FF/VI effectiveness and safety in predefined patient subgroups.
METHODS: Patients with COPD, exacerbation history, and receiving maintenance 
inhaler therapy, were randomised to initiate FF/VI 100/25 μg or continue usual 
care (UC) with 12 months' follow-up. Annual rates of moderate/severe 
exacerbations (primary outcome), selected secondary outcomes, and incidence of 
pneumonia serious adverse events of special interest (SAESI) were compared 
between randomisation groups across various patient subgroups/baseline treatment 
strata. SAESI rates by actual treatment were also assessed.
RESULTS: Lower exacerbation rates were observed for FF/VI versus UC across all 
subgroups/strata, including ICS + LABA therapy subset (8.0% [0.1, 15.4]), except 
in patients without baseline airflow limitation (-0.5% [-29.8, 22.1]). Larger 
reductions compared to the overall analysis were observed for patients on 
ICS-containing regimens (excluding LAMA) before the study (15.6% [3.4, 26.3]), 
and with baseline CAT score <10 (25.3% [-0.4, 44.4]). Pneumonia SAESI rates were 
similar for FF/VI versus UC across all subgroups/strata, except the LABA, LAMA 
or LABA + LAMA stratum (incidence ratio 2.8 [0.9, 8.5]). SAESI rates were not 
increased for FF/VI versus other ICS + LABA.
CONCLUSIONS: Initiating FF/VI versus continuing UC reduced exacerbation rates 
without increased pneumonia SAESI risk compared to other ICS-containing regimens 
and in various patient subgroups, consistent with primary study findings. FF/VI 
may be a therapeutic option for a broad population of COPD patients, including 
those with more severe disease.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.12.016
PMID: 30704700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Mar 1;14:547-556. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S185362. eCollection 2019.

COPD patients' characteristics, usual care, and adherence to guidelines: the 
Greek UNLOCK study.

Tsiligianni I(1), Kampouraki M(2), Ierodiakonou D(3), Poulonirakis I(4), 
Papadokostakis P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Crete, 
Herkalion, Crete, Greece, i.tsiligianni@uoc.gr.
(2)Primary Care Practice, Health Center of Moires, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(3)Heraklion University Hospital, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(4)Primary Care Practice, Health Center of Agia Varvara, Heraklion, Crete, 
Greece.
(5)Primary Care Practice, Garipa, Herkalion, Crete, Greece.

PURPOSE: GOLD guidelines classify COPD patients into A-D groups based on health 
status as assessed by COPD Assessment Test (CAT) or mMRC tools and exacerbations 
and recommend single or dual long-acting bronchodilators as maintenance therapy, 
with additional inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) if the disease remains 
uncontrolled. We aimed to classify primary care COPD patients into A-D groups, 
assess usual treatment and adherence to guidelines, potential mismatches between 
CAT-and mMRC-based classification and described symptoms within groups.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 257 primary care COPD patients were enrolled 
between 2015 and 2016 in Greece. Physicians used structured interviews to 
collect cross-sectional data including demographics, symptoms, CAT, mMRC scores, 
and medications. Patients were classified into A-D groups based on CAT and mMRC, 
and prevalence of symptoms and medication was estimated within A-D groups. 
Interviews with physicians were also performed to explore additional issues 
about treatment and adherence to guidelines.
RESULTS: Mean (SD) age was 65 (12.3) years with 79% males. The majority of 
patients reported uncontrolled symptoms (91% and 61% with ≥10 CAT or ≥2 mMRC 
scores, respectively). Thirty-seven percentage had $2 exacerbations in the past 
year. Group B was the largest followed by Groups D, A, and C. Patients were 
classified as more severe by CAT than by mMRC. In all groups, the majority were 
treated with combined long-acting beta agonist/ICS (> 50%). When patients were 
asked to report their main symptoms, dyspnea and cough were the most important 
symptoms mentioned, and there was a great variation between the A-D groups. 
However, Groups A-C reported mainly morning symptoms, whereas Group D suffered 
symptoms all day. Physicians reported a significant number of barriers to 
implementing guidelines, eg, frequent lack of guideline updates, access to 
diagnostic procedures, and prescription-reimbursement issues.
CONCLUSION: Our study confirms poor adherence to guidelines regarding treatment 
with an overuse of ICS and important barriers to implementation. A mismatch in 
classification occurs depending on the tool used, which can mislead clinicians 
in their choice of treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S185362
PMCID: PMC6402614
PMID: 30880944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


33. Eur Respir Rev. 2019 Apr 17;28(152):180121. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0121-2018. 
Print 2019 Jun 30.

Endobronchial valves for severe emphysema.

Hartman JE(1)(2), Vanfleteren LEGW(3)(4)(5), van Rikxoort EM(6), Klooster 
K(7)(2), Slebos DJ(7)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Pulmonary diseases, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands j.hartman@umcg.nl.
(2)Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)COPD Centre, Sahlgrenska University Hospital and Institute of Medicine, 
Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Dept of Development and Education, CIRO+, Centre of Expertise for Chronic 
Organ Failure, Horn, The Netherlands.
(5)Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre (MUMC+), 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(6)Depat of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Dept of Pulmonary diseases, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

The results of the randomised controlled trials investigating the bronchoscopic 
lung volume reduction treatment using endobronchial valves (EBV) are promising, 
and have led to their inclusion in treatment guidelines, US Food and Drug 
Administration approval and inclusion in routine care in an increasing number of 
countries. The one-way valve treatment has advanced and is now a regular 
treatment option. However, this new phase will lead to new challenges in terms 
of implementation. We believe that key issues in future research concern 
advanced patient selection, improved methods for target lobe selection, 
increased knowledge on the predictive risk of a pneumothorax, positioning of 
pulmonary rehabilitation in conjunction with the EBV treatment, the positioning 
of lung volume reduction surgery versus EBV treatment, and the long-term 
efficacy, adverse events, impact on exacerbations and hospitalisations, costs 
and survival. Hopefully, the increasing number of patients treated, the setup of 
(inter)national registries and future research efforts will further optimise all 
aspects of this treatment.

Copyright ©ERS 2019.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0121-2018
PMID: 30996040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: J.E. Hartman has nothing 
to disclose. Conflict of interest: L.E.G.W. Vanfleteren reports personal fees 
from PulmonX, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: E.M. van 
Rikxoort reports other funding from Thirona, during the conduct of the study. 
Conflict of interest: K. Klooster has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: 
D-J. Slebos reports grants, personal fees, non-financial support and other 
funding from PulmonX Inc., CA, USA, during the conduct of the study; and grants, 
personal fees, non-financial support and other funding from PneumRx/BTG, CA, 
USA, outside the submitted work.


34. Scand J Prim Health Care. 2019 Dec;37(4):459-467. doi: 
10.1080/02813432.2019.1684015. Epub 2019 Nov 7.

COPD patients need more information about self-management: a cross-sectional 
study in Swedish primary care.

Sandelowsky H(1)(2), Krakau I(2)(3), Modin S(2), Ställberg B(4), Nager A(2).

Author information:
(1)Academic Primary Health Care Centre, Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(2)Section for Family Medicine and Primary Care, NVS, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Epidemiology, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Family Medicine and 
Preventive Medicine, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Objective: In Sweden, patients with chronic conditions, such as chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), often receive education at specialized 
nurse-led clinics at primary health care centers (PHCCs). Identifying patients' 
needs for information about COPD is the key to individualized care. This study 
aimed to assess self-reported needs for information about COPD in primary care 
patients with either moderate (GOLD 2) or severe (GOLD 3) COPD and identify 
patient characteristics and exacerbation patterns associated with the 
findings.Design: A cross-sectional study.Setting: Twenty-four PHCCs in 
Stockholm, Sweden.Subjects: Randomly selected primary care patients with COPD in 
GOLD stages 2 and 3 (n = 542).Main outcome measures: The Lung Information Needs 
Questionnaire (LINQ) was used to assess perceived information needs. Spirometry 
results and descriptive, self-reported data on patient factors such as 
exacerbation history, treatment, smoking, weight/height, comorbidities, health 
care contacts, education and symptoms were collected.Results: Overall, the 
greatest reported needs were for information about self-management and diet. 
GOLD 2 patients (68%) expressed greater needs for information than GOLD 3 
patients (32%). We found significant associations between high information needs 
and patient-related factors such as 'No assigned GP' (OR = 4.32 [95% CI 
2.65-7.05]) and 'No contact with COPD nurse in the past 12 months' (OR = 1.83 
[95% CI 1.19-2.81]).Conclusion: COPD patients felt they knew too little about 
self-management of their disease. Low information needs were strongly associated 
with continuity in patient-GP consultations and moderately associated with 
contact with a COPD nurse. These associations were strongest in patients with 
moderate COPD.Key points: As patients with COPD often have multimorbidity, 
identifying patients' needs for information about COPD is essential to providing 
individualized patient education and care. In this study of 542 patients from 24 
Swedish primary care centers, we found that:Patients with COPD, particularly 
those with moderate airflow limitation (i.e. GOLD 2) felt they needed more 
information about COPD than currently provided by health care professionals in 
primary care.Low information needs were strongly associated with continuity in 
patient-GP consultations and moderately associated with contact with a COPD 
nurse. GPs' part in COPD patient education should not be overlooked, as 
individualized COPD care relies on GPs' expertise in managing patients with 
multimorbidity.

DOI: 10.1080/02813432.2019.1684015
PMCID: PMC6883432
PMID: 31694439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 6;14:2835-2848. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S217710. eCollection 2019.

An Evaluation Of Single And Dual Long-Acting Bronchodilator Therapy As Effective 
Interventions In Maintenance Therapy-Naïve Patients With COPD.

Singh D(1), D'Urzo AD(2), Donohue JF(3), Kerwin EM(4), Molins E(5), Chuecos 
F(5), Ribera A(5), Jarreta D(5).

Author information:
(1)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester University 
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(2)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
North Carolina Pulmonary Critical Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Clinical Research Institute, Medford, OR, USA.
(5)BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Ideally, treatment recommendations for maintenance therapy-naïve 
patients with COPD should be based on studies conducted specifically in this 
population. We have reviewed evidence from previous studies of pharmacological 
treatments in maintenance therapy-naïve patients with COPD and performed a new 
post-hoc analysis of dual bronchodilator treatment in this population, aiming to 
assess the effectiveness of these interventions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature review identified clinical trials that 
included analyses of patients with COPD who were maintenance therapy-naïve with 
long-acting β2-agonists (LABA) or long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA). 
Additionally, a post-hoc subgroup analysis was conducted for maintenance 
therapy-naïve patients with COPD in two large phase III, randomized, 
double-blind, 24-week trials investigating the efficacy of aclidinium 
bromide/formoterol fumarate (AB/FF) fixed-dose combination versus monotherapy or 
placebo (ACLIFORM [NCT01462942] and AUGMENT [NCT01437397]).
RESULTS: Treatment-naïve patients with COPD often represent a population of 
patients at the earliest stage at which most patients seek treatment. Of nine 
relevant studies identified, all reported positive findings for efficacy of 
LABA, LAMA, or LABA/LAMA treatment in maintenance therapy-naïve populations. 
Improvements were observed in lung function, symptoms, and health status versus 
monotherapy or placebo. Post-hoc analysis of ACLIFORM and AUGMENT demonstrated 
that AB/FF was effective in improving lung function in patients who had received 
no prior maintenance therapy. AB/FF showed improvements in 1 hr post-dose FEV1, 
trough FEV1, and patient-reported outcomes versus placebo and monotherapies. 
Combined with reviews of previous studies in maintenance therapy-naïve patients, 
these findings suggest that earlier intervention with a dual bronchodilator 
maintenance therapy, such as AB/FF, may provide significantly greater benefits 
than LAMA or LABA mono-bronchodilator therapy as a first maintenance treatment 
for COPD.
CONCLUSION: These data show that therapeutic intervention is effective in 
treatment-naïve patients. Intervention with dual bronchodilator therapy as a 
first maintenance treatment for COPD may provide greater benefits than LAMA or 
LABA monotherapy.

© 2019 Singh et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S217710
PMCID: PMC6902852
PMID: 31827323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DS is supported by the NIHR Manchester 
Biomedical Research Centre; and has received sponsorship to attend international 
meetings, honoraria for lecturing or attending advisory boards and research 
grants from various pharmaceutical companies including Apellis, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A, Cipla, Genentech, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, Johnson & Johnson, Mundipharma, Novartis, 
Peptinnovate Ltd., Pfizer Inc, Pulmatrix, Skyepharma, Teva, Theravance 
Biopharma, Menarini, and Verona Pharma. ADD has received research, consulting, 
and lecturing fees from Almirall, Altana, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim 
(Canada) Ltd, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, KOS Pharmaceuticals, Merck 
Canada, Methapharm, Novartis Canada/USA, ONO Pharmaceutical Co., Pfizer Canada, 
Schering-Plough, Sepracor, and SkyePharma. JFD has received consulting fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Circassia, GSK, Mylan, Theravance, 
and Sunovion. He is a member of the Data Monitoring Committee for AstraZeneca. 
EMK has participated in consulting, advisory boards, speaker panels, or received 
travel reimbursement from Amphastar Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Cipla, Chesi, Forest Laboratories LLC, GSK, Mylan, Novartis, Oriel, 
Pearl, Sunovion, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., and Theravance Biopharma. 
He has conducted multicenter clinical research trials for ~40 pharmaceutical 
companies. EM, FC, and DJ are employees of AstraZeneca and former employees of 
Almirall S.A., Barcelona, Spain. AR is a former employee of Almirall S.A., 
Barcelona, Spain and was an employee of AstraZeneca at the time the study was 
conducted. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


36. PLoS Med. 2019 Nov 15;16(11):e1002958. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002958. 
eCollection 2019 Nov.

Comparisons of exacerbations and mortality among regular inhaled therapies for 
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Systematic review 
and Bayesian network meta-analysis.

Lee HW(1), Park J(1), Jo J(2), Jang EJ(3), Lee CH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Statistics, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea.
(3)Department of Information Statistics, Andong National University, Andong, 
South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Although exacerbation and mortality are the most important clinical 
outcomes of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the drug 
classes that are the most efficacious in reducing exacerbation and mortality 
among all possible inhaled drugs have not been determined.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We performed a systematic review (SR) and Bayesian network 
meta-analysis (NMA). We searched Medline, EMBASE, the Cochrane Central Register 
of Controlled Trials, ClinicalTrials.gov, the European Union Clinical Trials 
Register, and the official websites of pharmaceutical companies (from inception 
to July 9, 2019). The eligibility criteria were as follows: (1) parallel-design 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs); (2) adults with stable COPD; (3) 
comparisons among long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), long-acting 
beta-agonists (LABAs), inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs), combined treatment 
(ICS/LAMA/LABA, LAMA/LABA, or ICS/LABA), or a placebo; and (4) study duration ≥ 
12 weeks. This study was prospectively registered in International Prospective 
Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO; CRD42017069087). In total, 219 trials 
involving 228,710 patients were included. Compared with placebo, all drug 
classes significantly reduced the total exacerbations and moderate to severe 
exacerbations. ICS/LAMA/LABA was the most efficacious treatment for reducing the 
exacerbation risk (odds ratio [OR] = 0.57; 95% credible interval [CrI] 
0.50-0.64; posterior probability of OR > 1 [P(OR > 1)] < 0.001). In addition, in 
contrast to the other drug classes, ICS/LAMA/LABA and ICS/LABA were associated 
with a significantly higher probability of reducing mortality than placebo (OR = 
0.74, 95% CrI 0.59-0.93, P[OR > 1] = 0.004; and OR = 0.86, 95% CrI 0.76-0.98, 
P[OR > 1] = 0.015, respectively). The results minimally changed, even in various 
sensitivity and covariate-adjusted meta-regression analyses. ICS/LAMA/LABA 
tended to lower the risk of cardiovascular mortality but did not show 
significant results. ICS/LAMA/LABA increased the probability of pneumonia (OR 
for triple therapy = 1.56; 95% CrI 1.19-2.03; P[OR > 1] = 1.000). The main 
limitation is that there were few RCTs including only less symptomatic patients 
or patients at a low risk.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that triple therapy can potentially be the 
best option for stable COPD patients in terms of reducing exacerbation and 
all-cause mortality.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002958
PMCID: PMC6857849
PMID: 31730642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


37. BMC Pulm Med. 2019 Mar 15;19(1):63. doi: 10.1186/s12890-019-0824-8.

Determinants of frailty in primary care patients with COPD: the Greek UNLOCK 
study.

Ierodiakonou D(1)(2), Kampouraki M(3), Poulonirakis I(4), Papadokostakis P(5), 
Lintovoi E(6), Karanassos D(7), Maltezis K(7), Chorti M(8), Petrovitsos E(8), 
Dimopoulou S(9), Hamind S(10), Gialamas I(11), Athanasiou P(2), Bempi V(2), 
Lambraki I(2), Tsiligianni I(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Crete, 
Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(2)Heraklion University Hospital, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(3)Primary care practice, Health Center of Moires, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(4)Primary care practice, Health Center of Agia Varvara, Heraklion, Crete, 
Greece.
(5)Primary care practice, Garipa, Herkalion, Crete, Greece.
(6)Primary care practice, Corfu, Greece.
(7)Primary care practice, Akraifnio, Boeotia, Greece.
(8)Primary care practice, Attica, Greece.
(9)Primary care practice, Chalkidiki, Greece.
(10)Primary care practice, Santorini, Cyclades Islands, Greece.
(11)Primary care practice, Health Center of Sitia, Sitia General Hospital, 
Lasithi, Crete, Greece.
(12)Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Crete, 
Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. i.tsiligianni@uoc.gr.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is a state of increased vulnerability that has a significant 
risk of unfavorable outcomes such as increased dependency and/or death, but 
little is known about frailty in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD).
METHOD: We aimed to determine the prevalence of frailty in COPD patients and to 
identify the associated risk factors. Two hundred fifty-seven COPD patients 
enrolled from primary care in Greece between 2015 and 2016. Physicians used 
structured interviews to collect cross-sectional data including demographics, 
medical history, symptoms and COPD Assessment Tool (CAT) or modified Medical 
Research Council Dyspnea scale (mMRC) score. Patients were classified into 
severity groups according to GOLD 2017 guidelines. Participants completed the 
The Frail Non-Disabled (FiND) questionnaire, exploring the frailty and 
disability domains. In the present analyses, frail patients with and without 
mobility disability were pooled and were compared to non-frail patients. Factors 
associated with frailty were analyzed using univariate and multivariate logistic 
regression.
RESULTS: Mean (SD) age was 65 (12.3) with 79% males. The majority of patients 
suffered with frailty (82%) of which 76.8% had mobility disability. 84.2% were 
married/with partner and 55.4% retired. 55.6% were current smokers. Uncontrolled 
disease (≥10 CAT score) was reported in 91.1% and 37.2% of patients had ≥2 
exacerbations in the past year. Dyspnea (38%) and cough (53.4%) were the main 
symptoms. Main comorbidities were hypertension (72.9%), hyperlipidaemia (24.6%) 
and diabetes (11%). Risk of frailty was significantly increased with age (OR; 
95%CI: 1.05; 1.02-1.08), hypertension (2.25; 1.14-4.45), uncontrolled disease 
(≥10 CAT score 4.65; 1.86-11.63, ≥2 mMRC score 5.75 (2.79-11.85) or ≥ 2 
exacerbations 1.73; 1.07-2.78), smoking cessation (ex compared to current 
smokers: 2.37; 1.10-5.28) and GOLD status (B&D compared to A&C groups: CAT-based 
4.65; 1.86-11.63; mMRC-based: 5.75; 2.79-11.85). In multivariate regression 
smoking cessation and GOLD status remained significant. Gender, body mass index, 
occupational or marital status, symptoms and other comorbidities were not 
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty with mobility disability is common in COPD patients and 
severity of disease increases the risk. It is possible that frail patients are 
more likely to quit smoking perhaps because of their disability and uncontolled 
disease. Routine assessment of frailty in addition to COPD control may allow 
early interventions for preventing or delaying progression of frailty and 
improvement in COPD disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-019-0824-8
PMCID: PMC6419845
PMID: 30876423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
subjects signed a consent form and ethical approval was provided by the 
University of Crete Ethics Committee. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors have no competing interests to declare, 
financial or otherwise related to this publication. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer 
Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.


38. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 19;14:343-352. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S184653. eCollection 2019.

Medication adherence and persistence in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
patients receiving triple therapy in a USA commercially insured population.

Bogart M(1), Stanford RH(1), Laliberté F(2), Germain G(2), Wu JW(2), Duh MS(3).

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline plc, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA, 
michael.r.bogart@gsk.com.
(2)Groupe d'Analyse, Ltée, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(3)Analysis Group Inc., Boston, MA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: This longitudinal, retrospective cohort study of patients with 
COPD describes baseline characteristics, adherence, and persistence following 
initiation of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)/long-acting β2-agonists 
(LABA)/long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) from multiple inhaler triple 
therapy (MITT).
METHODS: Patients aged ≥40 years receiving MITT between January 2012 and 
September 2015 were identified from the IQVIA™ Real-world Data Adjudicated 
Claims-USA database. MITT was defined as subjects with ≥1 overlapping days' 
supply of three COPD medications (ICS, LABA, and LAMA). Adherence (proportion of 
days covered, PDC) and discontinuation (defined as a gap of 1, 30, 60, or 90 
days of supply in any of the three components of the triple therapy) were 
calculated for each patient over 12 months of follow-up. In addition, analyses 
were stratified by number of inhalers.
RESULTS: In total, 14,635 MITT users were identified (mean age, 62 years). Mean 
PDC for MITT at 12 months was 0.37%. Mean PDC for the ICS/LABA and LAMA 
component at 12 months was 49% (0.49±0.31; median, 0.47) and 54% (0.54±0.33; 
0.56), respectively. The proportion of adherent patients (PDC ≥0.8) at 12 months 
was 14% for MITT. Allowing for a 30-day gap from last day of therapy, 86% of 
MITT users discontinued therapy during follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Patients with COPD had low adherence to and persistence with MITT in 
a real-world setting. Mean PDC for each single inhaler component was higher than 
the mean PDC observed with MITT. Reducing the number of inhalers may improve 
overall adherence to intended triple therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S184653
PMCID: PMC6388782
PMID: 30863037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure MB and RHS are employees of 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. and own shares in GSK. FL, GG, JWW, and MSD are employees 
of Analysis Group, Inc., a consulting company that has received research funds 
from GlaxoSmithKline plc. to conduct this study but they were not paid for 
manuscript development. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


39. Thorax. 2019 May;74(5):439-446. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2018-211855. Epub 2019 
Jan 7.

Biomarkers and clinical outcomes in COPD: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Fermont JM(1)(2), Masconi KL(2), Jensen MT(3)(4), Ferrari R(5), Di Lorenzo 
VAP(6), Marott JM(4), Schuetz P(7), Watz H(8), Waschki B(8), Müllerova H(9), 
Polkey MI(10), Wilkinson IB(1), Wood AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Experimental Medicine and Immunotherapeutics, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit, Department of Public Health and Primary 
Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Copenhagen City Heart Study, Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Botucatu Medical 
School, Univ Estadual Paulista, UNESP, Botucatu, Brazil.
(6)Department of Physiotherapy, Federal University of Sao Carlos (UFSCar), São 
Carlos/São Paulo, Brazil.
(7)Internal Medicine and Emergency Medicine, Kantonsspital Aarau, Univertsity of 
Basel, Aarau, Switzerland.
(8)LungenClinic Grosshansorf, Airway Research Center North, German Center for 
Lung Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany.
(9)Worldwide Epidemiology, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Uxbridge, UK.
(10)Respiratory Muscle Laboratory, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Conventional measures to evaluate COPD may fail to capture systemic 
problems, particularly musculoskeletal weakness and cardiovascular disease. 
Identifying these manifestations and assessing their association with clinical 
outcomes (ie, mortality, exacerbation and COPD hospital admission) is of 
increasing clinical importance.
OBJECTIVE: To assess associations between 6 min walk distance (6MWD), heart 
rate, fibrinogen, C reactive protein (CRP), white cell count (WCC), interleukins 
6 and 8 (IL-6 and IL-8), tumour necrosis factor-alpha, quadriceps maximum 
voluntary contraction, sniff nasal inspiratory pressure, short physical 
performance battery, pulse wave velocity, carotid intima-media thickness and 
augmentation index and clinical outcomes in patients with stable COPD.
METHODS: We systematically searched electronic databases (August 2018) and 
identified 61 studies, which were synthesised, including meta-analyses to 
estimate pooled HRs, following Meta-analysis of Observational Studies in 
Epidemiology (MOOSE) and Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses guidelines.
RESULTS: Shorter 6MWD and elevated heart rate, fibrinogen, CRP and WCC were 
associated with higher risk of mortality. Pooled HRs were 0.80 (95% CI 0.73 to 
0.89) per 50 m longer 6MWD, 1.10 (95% CI 1.02 to 1.18) per 10 bpm higher heart 
rate, 3.13 (95% CI 2.14 to 4.57) per twofold increase in fibrinogen, 1.17 (95% 
CI 1.06 to 1.28) per twofold increase in CRP and 2.07 (95% CI 1.29 to 3.31) per 
twofold increase in WCC. Shorter 6MWD and elevated fibrinogen and CRP were 
associated with exacerbation, and shorter 6MWD, higher heart rate, CRP and IL-6 
were associated with hospitalisation. Few studies examined associations with 
musculoskeletal measures.
CONCLUSION: Findings suggest 6MWD, heart rate, CRP, fibrinogen and WCC are 
associated with clinical outcomes in patients with stable COPD. Use of 
musculoskeletal measures to assess outcomes in patients with COPD requires 
further investigation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42016052075.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2018-211855
PMCID: PMC6484697
PMID: 30617161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: GlaxoSmithKline, a 
consortium partner, funded JMF. HM is an employee of GSK and own shares and 
stock options of GSK Plc. MIP received grants from GSK outside the submitted 
work. IBW received grants from GSK during the conduct of the study and outside 
the submitted work.


40. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2019 Nov;61(5):567-574. doi: 
10.1165/rcmb.2018-0402OC.

Cigarette Smoke Triggers IL-33-associated Inflammation in a Model of Late-Stage 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Lee JH(1), Hailey KL(2), Vitorino SA(1), Jennings PA(2), Bigby TD(1)(3), Breen 
EC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, California; and.
(3)Pulmonary and Critical Care, Veterans Affairs San Diego, La Jolla, 
California.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2019 Nov;61(5):550-551.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a worldwide threat. Cigarette 
smoke (CS) exposure causes cardiopulmonary disease and COPD and increases the 
risk for pulmonary tumors. In addition to poor lung function, patients with COPD 
are susceptible to bouts of dangerous inflammation triggered by pollutants or 
infection. These severe inflammatory episodes can lead to additional 
exacerbations, hospitalization, further deterioration of lung function, and 
reduced survival. Suitable models of the inflammatory conditions associated with 
CS, which potentiate the downward spiral in patients with COPD, are lacking, and 
the underlying mechanisms that trigger exacerbations are not well understood. 
Although initial CS exposure activates a protective role for vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) functions in barrier integrity, chronic 
exposure depletes the pulmonary VEGF guard function in severe COPD. Thus, we 
hypothesized that mice with compromised VEGF production and challenged with CS 
would trigger human-like severe inflammatory progression of COPD. In this model, 
we discovered that CS exposure promotes an amplified IL-33 cytokine response and 
severe disease progression. Our VEGF-knockout model combined with CS 
recapitulates severe COPD with an influx of IL-33-expressing macrophages and 
neutrophils. Normally, IL-33 is quickly inactivated by a post-translational 
disulfide bond formation. Our results reveal that BAL fluid from the CS-exposed, 
VEGF-deficient cohort promotes a significantly prolonged lifetime of active 
proinflammatory IL-33. Taken together, our data demonstrate that with the loss 
of a VEGF-mediated protective barrier, the CS response switches from a localized 
danger to an uncontrolled long-term and long-range, amplified, IL-33-mediated 
inflammatory response that ultimately destroys lung function.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2018-0402OC
PMCID: PMC6827064
PMID: 30973786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Chron Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;16:1479973119867949. doi: 
10.1177/1479973119867949.

COPD patients prescribed inhaled corticosteroid in general practice: Based on 
disease characteristics according to guidelines?

Savran O(1), Godtfredsen N(1)(2), Sørensen T(3), Jensen C(4), Ulrik CS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Respiratory Research Unit Hvidovre, Department of Respiratory Medicine, 
Hvidovre Hospital, Hvidovre, Denmark.
(2)2 Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(3)3 Værløse Lægehus, Værløse, Denmark.
(4)4 Lægehuset Remisen, Præstø, Denmark.

In a primary care setting, our aim was to investigate characteristics of 
patients classified as having chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and 
currently being prescribed inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs). The electronic 
patient record system in each participating general practice was searched for 
patients coded as COPD (ICPC, Second Edition code R95) and treated with ICS (ACT 
code R03AK and R03BA, that is, ICS in combination with a long-acting β2-agonist) 
or ICS as monotherapy. Data, if available, on demographics, smoking habits, 
spirometry, COPD medication, symptom score, blood eosinophils, co-morbidity and 
exacerbation history were retrieved from the medical records for all identified 
cases. Of all patients registered in the 138 participating general practices, 
12.560 (3%) were coded as COPD, of whom 32% were prescribed ICS. The final study 
sample comprised 2.289 COPD patients currently prescribed ICS (98% also 
prescribed long-acting β2-agonist), with 24% being coded as both COPD and 
asthma. Post-bronchodilator spirometry was available in 79% (mean forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second 60% pred (standard deviation (SD) 23.3)), symptom 
severity score in 53% (mean Medical Research Council score 2.7 (SD 1.1)) and 56% 
of the COPD patients had had no exacerbation in the previous year (and 45% not 
within the 2 previous years). Blood eosinophils were measured in 67% of the 
patients. Information on severity of airflow limitation was missing in 15% of 
the patients, and the combined information on symptom severity and exacerbation 
history was missing in in 46%. Most of the patients (74%) were managed only by 
their general practitioner. Although only one-third of the COPD patients were 
prescribed ICSs, our findings from this study of a large cohort of patients 
prescribed ICSs for COPD in general practice suggest that more detailed 
assessment of diagnosis and disease characteristics is likely to improve the 
risk-benefit ratio of maintenance therapy with ICSs in COPD patients managed in 
primary care.

DOI: 10.1177/1479973119867949
PMCID: PMC6704538
PMID: 31431060

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: The authors 
declare that they have received fee for drafting the manuscript (OS as part of 
his candidate thesis at the University of Copenhagen) and as members of the 
steering committee of the study (NG, TS, CJ and CSU) from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Denmark. The authors declare that they have no other potential conflicts of 
interest.


42. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 3;14:2663-2671. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S225258. eCollection 2019.

Evaluation of the Characteristics of Asthma in Severe and Extremely Severe COPD.

Chen FJ(#)(1), Lin GP(#)(1), Huang XY(1), Liu YL(1), Zeng ZM(1), Guo YB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Biotherapy for asthma may be useful in patients suffering from 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with asthma characteristics. 
Therefore, the evaluation and close monitoring of asthma characteristics in 
severe and extremely severe COPD can guide treatment decisions to improve 
prognosis.
METHODS: Stable patients suffering from COPD and having a forced expiratory 
volume in 1 s (FEV1%) of ≤50% (GOLD 3-4) in the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-Sen University from December 2014 to June 2018 were retrospectively enrolled 
in this study and evaluated in terms of their asthma characteristics (blood 
eosinophil counts, fractional exhaled NO [FeNO] values, and reversibility).
RESULTS: A total of 178 patients with an average age of 65.62±9.28 years were 
enrolled in this study. A total of 85 patients had an improvement of ≥12% in 
FEV1%, and 61 of these patients had an absolute increase of >200 mL. Of 122 
patients, 68 had blood eosinophil counts of ≥150 cells/μl, whereas 27 showed 
blood eosinophil counts ≥300 cells/μl. The blood eosinophil of ≥2% was found in 
66/122 (54.10%) patients, whereas ≥3% was found in 51/122 (41.80%) patients. A 
total of 46 of 58 patients had an increased serum IgE level of ≥30 IU/mL, and 32 
patients had an IgE of ≥100 IU/mL. The FeNO value of ≥25 ACO (ppb) was found in 
51/155 (32.90%) patients. Furthermore, 43 patients had asthma-COPD overlap 
(ACO), and the FeNO values in the ACO group was 26.13±14.91 ppb, which was 
significantly higher than that in the COPD alone group (20.99±9.16 ppb; 
P=0.016). A total of 12 patients with ACO had a negative response after 
bronchodilation. In the COPD alone group, 34 patients had an absolute increase 
of >200 mL, whereas 55 of the 95 patients had blood eosinophil counts of ≥150 
cells/μl. The blood eosinophilia of ≥2% was found in 54/95 (56.84%) patients. A 
total of 36 of 45 patients had an increased serum IgE level of ≥30 IU/mL. The 
FeNO value of 34/123 (27.64%) patients was ≥25 ppb.
CONCLUSION: The characteristics of asthma are common findings in patients with 
severe and extremely severe COPD. Biomarkers should be actively used to evaluate 
the characteristics of asthma in these patients. If the characteristics of 
asthma exist, then anti-IgE or anti-IL-5 therapy should be considered to reduce 
exacerbation.

© 2019 Chen et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S225258
PMCID: PMC6899161
PMID: 31819399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


43. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Jun;56:39-50. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.03.004. Epub 
2019 Mar 12.

Pharmacological characterization of the interaction between tiotropium bromide 
and olodaterol on human bronchi and small airways.

Calzetta L(1), Rogliani P(2), Page C(3), Rinaldi B(4), Cazzola M(2), Matera 
MG(4).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
luigino.calzetta@uniroma2.it.
(2)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(3)Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Science, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.

Combining a long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) with a long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) is the cornerstone to treat patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). In this study we have characterized the interaction 
between the LAMA tiotropium bromide, and the LABA olodaterol, on the contractile 
tone of human medium bronchi and small airways. The response to a combination of 
tiotropium bromide and olodaterol was assessed at sub-maximal contractile tone 
induced by carbachol. The duration of action was studied in tissue contracted by 
transmural stimulation. Relaxation of bronchial tone was expressed as % of 
maximal response to papaverine. Drug interactions were analyzed by the Bliss 
Independence method and Unified Theory. Tiotropium bromide/olodaterol 
combination induced a significant synergistic relaxant response (P < 0.05 vs. 
expected additive effect) in medium bronchi and small airways pre-contracted by 
carbachol, by enhancing relaxation +22.13 ± 4.42% and +26.31 ± 12.39%, 
respectively. The combination of tiotropium bromide and olodaterol also reduced 
the airway smooth muscle contractility elicited by transmural stimulation by 
73.60 ± 3.10%. The extent of synergy was strong to very strong, and was 
supported by the release of neuronal acetylcholine, cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate levels, and activation of iberiotoxin-sensitive KCa++ channels. 
Conversely, the interaction between tiotropium bromide and olodaterl was 
independent of the activity at M2 muscarinic receptors. These results indicate 
that tiotropium bromide/olodaterol combination leads to a potent and durable 
synergistic relaxation of human medium bronchi and small airways. Further 
pharmacological studies are needed to confirm these results in clinical 
settings.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.03.004
PMID: 30876907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Ther Umsch. 2019 Nov;76(6):301-310. doi: 10.1024/0040-5930/a001103.

[Development of inhaled therapies for COPD and asthma].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Gregoriano C(1), Tschacher A(1), Grendelmeier P(1), Cadus C(1).

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Universitätsklinik, Abteilung Pneumologie, Kantonsspital 
Baselland, Liestal.

Development of inhaled therapies for COPD and asthma Abstract. Inhaled therapies 
still represent one of the most important pillars of the COPD and asthma 
treatments. In recent years, the importance of inhaled corticosteroids in the 
treatment of COPD changed again and again and currently it seems that they are 
gaining more importance again. In the future, inhaled therapies will 
increasingly focus on biomarkers. New to the market are the "triple therapies as 
a fixed combination", whose success will be evident in the next few years. 
Despite the great variety of new agents, new combinations and new inhalation 
systems, it is important to keep a good overview and to focus on the individual 
benefit of the patients. The goal is to find the products that are suitable for 
the individual patient in a dosage form that is ideal for him. A correct 
inhalation technique and a good medication adherence to the prescribed treatment 
plan is crucial for the success of an inhaled therapy.

Publisher: Zusammenfassung. Die inhalative Therapie ist nach wie vor sowohl bei 
der COPD als auch beim Asthma eine wichtige Säule der Behandlung. Bei Asthma 
Patienten stehen primär die inhalativen Kortikosteroide im Vordergrund der 
Behandlung, während bei COPD Patienten vor allem Bronchodilatatoren eingesetzt 
werden. In den letzten Jahren änderte sich der Stellenwert der inhalativen 
Kortikosteroide in der COPD- Therapie immer wieder und aktuell scheinen sie für 
eine Subgruppe von Patienten wieder mehr an Bedeutung zu gewinnen. Auch bei den 
inhalativen Therapien wird man sich in Zukunft zunehmend an Biomarkern 
orientieren. Neu auf dem Markt sind die «Triple Therapien als Fixkombinationen», 
deren Erfolg sich in den nächsten Jahren zeigen wird. Trotz der grossen Vielfalt 
an neuen Wirkstoffen, neuen Kombinationen und neuen Inhalationssystemen, ist es 
wichtig eine gute Übersicht zu behalten und den individuellen Nutzen des 
Patienten in den Mittelpunkt zu stellen. Ziel ist es aus der Fülle der Angebote, 
die für den individuellen Patienten geeigneten Präparate in einer für ihn ideal 
anwendbaren Darreichungsform zu finden. Eine korrekte Inhalationstechnik und 
Adhärenz zum verschriebenen Therapieplan ist für den Erfolg der inhalativen 
Therapie entscheidend.

DOI: 10.1024/0040-5930/a001103
PMID: 31762413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Respir Res. 2019 Dec 4;20(1):277. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1249-x.

Inhaled corticosteroids and FEV(1) decline in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: a systematic review.

Whittaker HR(1), Jarvis D(2), Sheikh MR(2), Kiddle SJ(3), Quint JK(2).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Emmanuel Kaye 
Building, 1b Manresa Road, London, SW3 6LR, UK. h.whittaker@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Emmanuel Kaye 
Building, 1b Manresa Road, London, SW3 6LR, UK.
(3)MRC Biostatistics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Rate of FEV1 decline in COPD is heterogeneous and the extent to which inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) influence the rate of decline is unclear. The majority of 
previous reviews have investigated specific ICS and non-ICS inhalers and have 
consisted of randomised control trials (RCTs), which have specific inclusion and 
exclusion criteria and short follow up times. We aimed to investigate the 
association between change in FEV1 and ICS-containing medications in COPD 
patients over longer follow up times.MEDLINE and EMBASE were searched and 
literature comparing change in FEV1 in COPD patients taking ICS-containing 
medications with patients taking non-ICS-containing medications were identified. 
Titles, abstract, and full texts were screened and information extracted using 
the PICO checklist. Risk of bias was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias 
tool and a descriptive synthesis of the literature was carried out due to 
high heterogeneity of included studies.Seventeen studies met our inclusion 
criteria. We found that the difference in change in FEV1 in people using ICS and 
non-ICS containing medications depended on the study follow-up time. Shorter 
follow-up studies (1 year or less) were more likely to report an increase in 
FEV1 from baseline in both patients on ICS and in patients on non-ICS-containing 
medications, with the majority of these studies showing a greater increase in 
FEV1 in patients on ICS-containing medications. Longer follow-up studies 
(greater than 1 year) were more likely to report a decline in FEV1 from baseline 
in patients on ICS and in patients on non-ICS containing medications but rates 
of FEV1 decline were similar.Further studies are needed to better understand 
changes in FEV1 when ICS-containing medications are prescribed and to determine 
whether ICS-containing medications influence rate of decline in FEV1 in the long 
term. Results from inclusive trials and observational patient cohorts may 
provide information more generalisable to a population of COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1249-x
PMCID: PMC6894275
PMID: 31801539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Miss Whittaker reports grants from 
GlaxoSmithKline, outside the submitted work. Mr. Sheikh has no competing 
interests. Dr. Jarvis reports grants from European Union, grants from Cystic 
Fibrosis Trust, outside the submitted work. Dr. Kiddle reports grants from MRC, 
grants from Roche Diagnostics, grants from EPSRC, grants from BBSRC, grants from 
NIHR, grants from Alzheimer’s Society, grants from Eli Lily, grants from 
Jannsen, outside the submitted work. Dr. Quint reports grants from 
GlaxoSmithKline, grants from The Health Foundation, grants from MRC, grants from 
Wellcome Trust, grants from BLF, grants from Insmed, grants and other from AZ, 
grants from Bayer, grants and other from BI, grants and other from Chiesi, other 
from Teva outside the submitted work.


46. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 2;14:2733-2744. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S221852. eCollection 2019.

Effect of Erdosteine on COPD Exacerbations in COPD Patients with Moderate 
Airflow Limitation.

Calverley PM(1), Page C(2), Dal Negro RW(3), Fontana G(4), Cazzola M(5), Cicero 
AF(6), Pozzi E(7), Wedzicha JA(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Clinical Sciences Centre, University Hospital 
Aintree, Liverpool, UK.
(2)Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College, London, UK.
(3)Lung Unit, National Centre for Respiratory Pharmacoeconomics and 
Pharmacoepidemiology, Verona, Italy.
(4)Pulmonology Department, Cough Centre, Careggi University Hospital, Firenze, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Systems Medicine, Chair of Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Rome 'Tor Vergata', Rome, Italy.
(6)Medical and Surgical Department, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(7)Medical Affairs Department, Edmond Pharma, Paderno, Italy.
(8)Respiratory Division, National Heart And Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: The RESTORE study, a multi-national randomized, placebo-controlled 
study, showed that erdosteine - a muco-active antioxidant that modulates 
bacterial adhesiveness - reduced the rate and duration of exacerbations in 
moderate and severe COPD with a history of exacerbations. How much benefit 
patients with less severe disease experience when taking this drug remains 
unclear.
METHODS: This post hoc analysis of the 254 RESTORE participants with 
spirometrically-defined moderate COPD (post-bronchodilator forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second [FEV1] 50‒79% predicted) examined exacerbation rate and 
duration, time to first exacerbation, and exacerbation-free time. Data were 
analyzed using descriptive statistics and comparisons between treatment groups 
used Wilcoxon rank-sum tests, Mann-Whitney U-tests, or log rank tests.
RESULTS: Patients with moderate COPD received erdosteine 300 mg twice daily 
(n=126) or placebo (n=128) added to usual COPD therapy for 12 months. During 
this time, there were 53 exacerbations in the erdosteine group and 74 in the 
placebo group, with 42.1% and 57.8% of patients, respectively, experiencing an 
exacerbation. There was a 47% reduction in the mean exacerbation rate with 
erdosteine compared to placebo (0.27 vs 0.51 exacerbations per-patient per-year, 
respectively, P=0.003), and a 58.3% reduction in the mild exacerbation rate 
(0.23 vs 0.53 mild exacerbations per-patient per-year, P=0.001). Mean duration 
of exacerbations was 26% shorter in erdosteine-treated patients (9.1 vs 12.3 
days for placebo, P=0.022), with significant reductions in the duration of mild 
and moderate-to-severe exacerbations. Mean time to first exacerbation was 
prolonged by 7.7% (182 days for erdosteine vs 169 days for placebo, P<0.001) and 
the mean exacerbation-free time was increased by 51 days (279 days for 
erdosteine vs 228 days for placebo; P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that adding erdosteine to usual COPD 
maintenance therapy reduces the number of mild, and duration of all, 
exacerbations in patients with moderate COPD and a history of exacerbations.

© 2019 Calverley et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S221852
PMCID: PMC6896911
PMID: 31819405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EP is employed by Edmond Pharma. PC, CP, RDN, 
GF, MC, and AC report personal fees from Edmond Pharma. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this work.


47. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Nov 20;14:2543-2551. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S224735. eCollection 2019.

Impact Of Peak Oxygen Pulse On Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease.

Wu CW(1)(2), Hsieh PC(3)(4), Yang MC(1)(2), Tzeng IS(5), Wu YK(1)(2), Lan 
CC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Taipei Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi 
Medical Foundation, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Chinese Medicine, Taipei Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi 
Medical Foundation, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Post-Baccalaureate Chinese Medicine, School of 
Post-Baccalaureate Chinese Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Research, Taipei Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical 
Foundation, New Taipei City, Taiwan.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are at 
an increased risk of cardiovascular comorbidities such as pulmonary hypertension 
or heart failure. Impaired cardiovascular function often has a significant 
impact on patients with COPD. Oxygen pulse (O2P) is a surrogate for stroke 
volume. However, studies regarding O2P, health-related quality of life (HRQL), 
and exercise capacity in patients with COPD are lacking. We aimed to confirm the 
association between O2P, HRQL, exercise capacity, severe exacerbation of COPD, 
and other parameters in exercise testing.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study included 79 patients with COPD who underwent 
lung function testing, a cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET), Borg Dyspnea 
Scale evaluation, completion of the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire, and 
echocardiography. Cardiovascular comorbidities, COPD-related hospitalizations, 
and emergency room visits were recorded. We compared these parameters between 
two groups of patients: those with normal peak O2P and those with impaired peak 
O2P. The relationships of peak O2P with CPET and lung function were analyzed 
using simple linear regression.
RESULTS: Patients with normal peak O2P had higher exercise capacity (peak oxygen 
uptake and work rate), better HRQL, lower dyspnea score, lower COPD-related 
hospitalizations, and higher circulatory and ventilator parameters than patients 
with impaired peak O2P. According to a simple linear regression analysis, the 
anaerobic threshold (AT) and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 
showed a significant association with peak O2P, and the Pearson correlation 
coefficients (Pearson's r) were 0.756 and 0.461, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Peak O2P has a significant impact on exercise capacity, HRQL, 
dyspnea, COPD-related hospitalization, and circulatory and ventilatory functions 
in patients with COPD. The AT and FEV1 have strong and moderate associations 
with peak O2P, respectively. Therefore, peak O2P is an important indicator of 
disease severity for patients with COPD.

© 2019 Wu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S224735
PMCID: PMC6875506
PMID: 31819392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


48. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 May 15;14:1019-1031. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S199251. eCollection 2019.

Medication management patterns among Medicare beneficiaries with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease who initiate nebulized arformoterol treatment.

Celli BR(1), Navaie M(2)(3), Xu Z(4), Cho-Reyes S(2), Dembek C(5), Gilmer TP(4).

Author information:
(1)Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Center, Harvard Medical School, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Global Strategy, Advance Health Solutions, LLC, New York, NY, USA.
(3)School of Professional Studies, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Family Medicine and Public Health, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(5)Global Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc, 
Marlborough, MA, USA.

Purpose: Global evidence-based treatment strategies for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) recommend using long-acting bronchodilators (LABDs) as 
maintenance therapy. However, COPD patients are often undertreated. We examined 
COPD treatment patterns among Medicare beneficiaries who initiated arformoterol 
tartrate, a nebulized long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA), and identified the 
predictors of initiation. Methods: Using a 100% sample of Medicare 
administrative data, we identified beneficiaries with a COPD diagnosis (ICD-9 
490-492.xx, 494.xx, 496.xx) between 2010 and 2014 who had ≥1 year of continuous 
enrollment in Parts A, B, and D, and ≥2 COPD-related outpatient visits within 30 
days or ≥1 hospitalization(s). After applying inclusion/exclusion criteria, 
three cohorts were identified: (1) study group beneficiaries who received 
nebulized arformoterol (n=11,886), (2) a subset of the study group with no LABD 
use 90 days prior to initiating arformoterol (n=5,542), and (3) control group 
beneficiaries with no nebulized LABA use (n=220,429). Logistic regression was 
used to evaluate predictors of arformoterol initiation. Odds ratios (ORs), 95% 
confidence intervals (CIs), and p values were computed. Results: Among 
arformoterol users, 47% (n=5,542) had received no LABDs 90 days prior to 
initiating arformoterol. These beneficiaries were being treated with a nebulized 
(50%) or inhaled (37%) short-acting bronchodilator or a systemic corticosteroid 
(46%), and many received antibiotics (37%). Compared to controls, beneficiaries 
who initiated arformoterol were significantly more likely to have had an 
exacerbation, a COPD-related hospitalization, and a pulmonologist or respiratory 
therapist visit prior to initiation (all p<0.05). Beneficiaries with 
moderate/severe psychiatric comorbidity or dual-eligible status were 
significantly less likely to initiate arformoterol, as compared to controls (all 
p<0.05). Conclusion: Medicare beneficiaries who initiated nebulized arformoterol 
therapy had more exacerbations and hospitalizations than controls 90 days prior 
to initiation. Findings revealed inadequate use of maintenance medications, 
suggesting a lack of compliance with evidence-based treatment guidelines.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S199251
PMCID: PMC6526678
PMID: 31190787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BRC received consultation remuneration as a 
member of the Medical Advisory Board at Advance Health Solutions, LLC. He has 
also been an expert pulmonologist consultant for Glaxo Smith Kline, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Astra Zeneca, Novartis, and Pulmonix. He reports personal 
fees from Boehringer INgelheim, Glaxo Smith Kline, Astra Zeneca, Novartis, and 
Chiesi, outside the submitted work. MN and SCR are employed by Advance Health 
Solutions, LLC which received funding from Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc. to 
oversee this study. ZX and TPG are employed by the University of California San 
Diego which received a grant from Advance Health Solutions, LLC to conduct this 
study. CD is employed by Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this work.


49. Respir Med. 2019 Apr;150:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.01.019. Epub 2019 Feb 6.

Assessment of COPD-related outcomes in patients initiating a once daily or twice 
daily ICS/LABA.

Stanford RH(1), Parker ED(2), Reinsch TK(3), Buikema AR(2), Blauer-Peterson 
C(2).

Author information:
(1)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
USA. Electronic address: richard.h.stanford@gsk.com.
(2)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum, Inc, Eden Prairie, MN, USA.
(3)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
USA; Division of Pharmaceutical Outcomes and Policy, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Use of inhaled corticosteroids and long acting beta agonist 
(ICS/LABA) combination therapy has been shown to decrease the frequency of 
exacerbations in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In 
this population, adherence to treatment is associated with better disease 
control and lower risk of COPD-related exacerbations in the future. Using a 
treatment with a more convenient regimen or easier-to-use device could improve 
patient adherence, improve disease control, decrease the frequency of 
exacerbations and minimize the COPD-related economic burden. Real-world 
information on the impact on healthcare costs and exacerbation risk of 
initiating once-daily or twice daily ICS/LABA in this patient population is 
limited. The objective of this study was to assess COPD-related healthcare 
costs, adherence, and exacerbations in COPD patients initiating treatment with 
fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100/25 (FF/VI) or budesonide/formoterol 160/4.5 
(BUD/F) using a large managed care database in the US.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study among COPD patients initiating 
FF/VI or BUD/F between January 01, 2014 and June 30, 2016. The analysis used the 
Optum Research Database (ORD) which contains patients from commercial and 
Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug (MAPD) plans. The study included new 
initiators of ICS/LABA as either FF/VI or BUD/F for COPD, ≥40 years of age at 
index, ≥15 months of continuous enrollment (12 months pre-index and ≥3 months 
post-index). New users of FF/VI or BUD/F were matched on baseline 
characteristics using propensity score matching (PSM) methods. Multivariate 
models including ordinary least squares regression, Lin's regression, logistic 
regression, and Cox proportional hazards were used to assess differences between 
the cohorts on outcomes of interest.
RESULTS: A total of 18,652 subjects met all inclusion and exclusion criteria 
with 5044 initiating FF/VI and 13,608 initiating BUD/F. Of these, 9026 subjects 
were matched at a 1:1 ratio (4513 patients in each cohort) and were included in 
the final analyses. Proportion of days covered (PDC), was significantly better 
for FF/VI (mean PDC [SD]: FF/VI: 0.46 [0.31], BUD/F: 0.41 [0.29], p < 0.001) 
while FF/VI was associated with a 9% lower risk (adj. hazard ratio (HR): 0.91, 
95% CI: 0.85-0.96) of having a moderate or severe COPD-related exacerbation. 
However, COPD-related healthcare costs were not significantly different, $11,521 
vs $10,986, p = 0.41 for FF/VI and BUD/F, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients initiating once-daily FF/VI were more adherent, and were 
associated with a lower risk of subsequent COPD-related exacerbations compared 
with twice-daily BUD/F, however this was not associated with a significant 
difference in costs. (GSK Study HO1617333/206702).

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.01.019
PMID: 30961933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 22;14:279-287. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S190086. eCollection 2019.

Changes in COPD inhaler prescriptions in the United Kingdom, 2000 to 2016.

Bloom CI(1), Elkin SL(2), Quint JK(1).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW3 6LR, 
UK, chloe.bloom06@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Imperial College NHS Trust, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Over the past two decades, there have been significant changes in 
the pharmacological management of COPD, due to an explosion of inhaler trials, 
and timely updation of national and international guidelines. We sought to 
describe temporal changes in prescribing practices in the United Kingdom, and 
some of the factors that may have influenced them.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: COPD patients were identified from UK primary care 
nationally representative electronic healthcare records (Clinical Practice 
Research Datalink), between 2000 and 2016. Prescription data were described by 
the three maintenance inhaled medication classes used, inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS), long-acting beta agonist (LABA), long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA), and their combinations, dual LABA-ICS, dual LAMA-LABA, or triple therapy 
LABA-ICS-LAMA. Differing patient characteristics across the six different 
therapy regimens were measured in 2016.
RESULTS: COPD patients were identified: 187,588 prevalent and incident inhaler 
users and 169,511 incident inhaler users. Since 2002, LAMA showed increasing 
popularity, while ICS alone exhibited an inverse trend. Triple therapy 
prescriptions rapidly increased as the first-line therapy until 2014 when 
LAMA-LABA prescriptions started to increase. By 2014, 41% of all COPD patients 
were maintained on triple therapy, and 13% were maintained on LAMA only. 
Characterizing the patients in 2016 revealed that those on triple therapy were 
more likely to have more severe disease, yet, over a third of patients on triple 
therapy had only mild disease.
CONCLUSION: UK prescribing practices were not in keeping with national 
guidelines but did appear to align with evidence from major drug trials and 
updated international guidelines. There has been a huge upsurge in triple 
therapy but incident data show this trend is beginning to reverse for initial 
management.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S190086
PMCID: PMC6349076
PMID: 30774325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr Bloom has no conflict of interest. 
Dr Elkin has received speaker fees from AZ, Chiesi, and Pfizer in the last 3 
years. Dr Quint, outside the submitted work, reports grants from The Health 
Foundation, MRC, British Lung Foundation, grants and personal fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Insmed, and Bayer, personal 
fees from Chiesi and Teva, and grants from IQVIA. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


51. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 19;14:2947-2958. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S157654. eCollection 2019.

Revefenacin: A Once-Daily, Long-Acting Bronchodilator For Nebulized Treatment Of 
COPD.

Donohue JF(1), Mahler DA(2)(3), Sethi S(4).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Medicine, UNC School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA.
(3)Director of Respiratory Services, Valley Regional Hospital, Claremont, NH, 
USA.
(4)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.

Bronchodilation with muscarinic antagonists, β2-agonists, and inhaled 
corticosteroids remains the foundation of pharmaceutical treatment for patients 
with stable COPD. These drugs are delivered from a variety of devices, including 
dry powder inhalers, pressurized metered-dose inhalers, soft-mist inhalers, or 
nebulizers. Nebulized delivery is often preferable in patients who are elderly, 
are cognitively impaired, are unable to generate sufficient inspiratory force to 
use their inhaler, have difficulty coordinating hand-breath activity, are too 
dyspneic to hold their breath for a sufficient time, and/or may be acutely ill. 
Revefenacin, a once-daily long-acting muscarinic antagonist for nebulization 
recently approved by the US FDA for the treatment of patients with COPD, was 
discovered and developed using "duration and lung selectivity-by-design." This 
strategy selected a molecule with a high lung-selective index to maximize 
bronchodilation and limit systemic anti-muscarinic side effects. In early-phase 
clinical studies, revefenacin for nebulization led to a rapid onset of 
bronchodilation that was sustained for 24 hrs in patients with moderate to 
severe COPD. Revefenacin also demonstrated minimal systemic exposure and good 
tolerability in these studies. Statistically and clinically significant 
improvements in lung function (ie, peak and/or trough FEV1) relative to placebo 
were observed with revefenacin in Phase III clinical trials of up to 3 months in 
patients with moderate to very severe COPD. Revefenacin was well tolerated in 
Phase III clinical trials with a low incidence of systemic antimuscarinic 
adverse events, which is consistent with its lung-selective design. There was no 
evidence of an increased risk of major cardiovascular events. Patient-reported 
outcome data from clinical trials indicated statistically significant 
improvements in several disease-specific measures. Revefenacin 175 μg for 
nebulization provides an effective once-daily treatment option for patients with 
moderate to very severe COPD who require or prefer nebulized therapy.

© 2019 Donohue et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S157654
PMCID: PMC6927563
PMID: 31908443

Conflict of interest statement: JFD is a consultant and advisory committee 
member for Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., AstraZeneca, GSK, Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals, Mylan Inc., and Sunovion Pharmaceuticals. DAM has served on 
advisory boards for AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Grifols, Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals, Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., and Trevi, and is on the 
speaker’s bureau for AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals. SS is a consultant and advisory committee member for Theravance 
Biopharma US, Inc., and received research support from Mylan Inc. The authors 
report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


52. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Nov 29;14:2681-2695. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S216072. eCollection 2019.

Cost-Effectiveness Of Once-Daily Single-Inhaler Triple Therapy In COPD: The 
IMPACT Trial.

Ismaila AS(1)(2), Risebrough N(3), Schroeder M(4), Shah D(5), Martin A(6), 
Goodall EC(7), Ndirangu K(5), Criner G(8), Dransfield M(9), Halpin DM(10), Han 
MK(11), Lomas DA(12).

Author information:
(1)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline plc, Collegeville, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(3)ICON Health Economics, ICON plc, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline plc, Brentford, UK.
(5)ICON Health Economics, ICON plc, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline plc, Uxbridge, UK.
(7)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, GlaxoSmithKline plc, Mississauga, ON, 
Canada.
(8)Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Lung Health 
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(10)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, 
UK.
(11)University of Michigan, Pulmonary and Critical Care, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(12)UCL Respiratory, University College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: We assessed the cost-effectiveness of single-inhaler fluticasone 
furoate (FF)/umeclidinium (UMEC)/vilanterol (VI) versus FF/VI or UMEC/VI from a 
Canadian public healthcare perspective, incorporating data from the IMPACT trial 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (NCT02164513).
METHODS: Baseline inputs and treatment effects from IMPACT were populated into 
the validated GALAXY-COPD disease progression model. Canadian unit costs and 
drug costs (Canadian dollars [C$], 2017) were applied to healthcare resource 
utilization and treatments. Future costs and health outcomes were discounted at 
1.5% annually. Analyses were probabilistic, and outputs included exacerbation 
rates, costs, and life years (LYs) and quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) 
gained.
RESULTS: Compared with FF/VI and UMEC/VI over a lifetime horizon, the analyses 
predicted that treatment with FF/UMEC/VI resulted in fewer moderate and severe 
exacerbations, more LYs and more QALYs gained, with a small incremental cost. 
The base-case incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) per QALY gained was 
C$18,989 (95% confidence interval [CI]: C$14,665, C$25,753) versus FF/VI and 
C$13,776 (95% CI: C$9787, C$19,448) versus UMEC/VI. FF/UMEC/VI remained 
cost-effective versus both FF/VI and UMEC/VI in all sensitivity analyses, 
including in scenario analyses that considered different intervention and 
comparator discontinuation rates, and treatment effects for subsequent therapy.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with FF/UMEC/VI was predicted to improve outcomes and be a 
cost-effective treatment option for patients with symptomatic COPD and a history 
of exacerbations compared with FF/VI or UMEC/VI, in Canada.

© 2019 Ismaila et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S216072
PMCID: PMC6890193
PMID: 31819401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following conflicts of 
interest during the last three years in relation to this article: A.S. Ismaila, 
M. Schroeder and A. Martin are employees of, and hold shares in, GlaxoSmithKline 
plc.; A.S. Ismaila is also an unpaid, part-time professor at McMaster 
University, Canada. E.C. Goodall is an employee of GlaxoSmithKline plc. N. 
Risebrough, D. Shah and K. Ndirangu are employees of ICON plc., which received 
funding from GlaxoSmithKline plc. to conduct this study, but were not themselves 
paid for development of this article. G. Criner reports grants and personal fees 
from GlaxoSmithKline plc., Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Mereo, AstraZeneca, 
Pulmonx, PneumRx, Olympus, Broncus, Lungpacer, Mereo, Nuvaira, ResMed, 
Respironics and Patara, Pearl, and Sanofi, personal fees from Verona, BTG, EOLO 
and NGM, and grants from ALung, Fisher Paykel and Galapagos, outside the 
submitted work. M. Dransfield reports personal and other fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. during the conduct of this study, and grants from 
Department of Defense, personal and other fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline plc., AstraZeneca and PneumRx/BTG, personal fees from Genentech, 
Quark Pharmaceuticals and Mereo, grants from NIH and American Lung Association 
and other fees from Novartis, Yungjin, Pulmonx and Boston Scientific, outside 
the submitted work. D.M.G. Halpin reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline plc. and Pfizer, and personal fees and non-financial 
support from Boehringer Ingelheim and Novartis, outside the submitted work. M.L. 
Han reports personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline plc. during the conduct of this 
study, and personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline plc., Boehringer Ingelheim, 
AstraZeneca, Mylan, and other fees from Novartis and Sunovion, outside of the 
submitted work. D.A. Lomas reports grants, personal fees and non-financial 
support from GlaxoSmithKline plc. during the conduct of the study, and personal 
fees and grants from GlaxoSmithKline plc., and personal fees from Griffols, 
outside of the submitted work. D.A. Lomas also chaired the Respiratory Therapy 
Area Board at GlaxoSmithKline plc. between 2012 and 2015. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this work.


53. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2019 Nov 12;42(11):832-837. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1001-0939.2019.11.009.

[Analysis of risk factors and consequences for concurrent obstructive sleep 
apnea in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Xiong MQ(1), Hu WH(1), Hu K(1), Zheng ZS(1), Dong ML(1), Mo HH(1), He JG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Renmin Hospital of 
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National 
Center for Cardiovascular Disease, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and 
Peaking Union Medical College, Beijing 100037, China.

Objective: To compare clinical characteristics between patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and COPD -OSA overlap, and to analyze the 
risk factors for OSA in patients with COPD. Methods: A total of 431 patients 
with COPD were divided into a COPD-OSA group with AHI>15 events/h or a COPD 
group with AHI ≤ 15 events/h according to the results of polysomnography, and 
their clinical characteristics were summarized. Risk factors for OSA overlap in 
COPD patients were identified by univariate and multivariate logistic regression 
analyses. Results: There were no significant differences in gender composition, 
dyspnea scale (mMRC) score, the numbers of acute exacerbations and 
hospitalizations in the last year, prevalence of coronary heart disease, or cor 
pulmonale or diabetes mellitus in the two groups (all P>0.05). Age, BMI, neck 
circumference, smoking index, COPD assessment test (CAT) score, the values of 
FEV(1) or FEV(1)%, FEV(1)/FVC ratios, and the prevalence of hypertension in the 
COPD-OSA group with AHI>15 events/h were significantly higher than in the COPD 
group with AHI ≤15 events/h, while the duration of COPD and the proportion of 
severe COPD were lower than the COPD group with AHI≤ 15 (P<0.05). The scores of 
Charlson Comorbidity Index, Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) and Sleep Apnea 
Clinical Score (SACS) in the COPD-OSA group were significantly higher than in 
the COPD group with AHI≤ 15, with all P values<0.05. Risk factors for AHI>15 OSA 
coinciding in patients with COPD included BMI, neck circumference, ESS, SACS and 
CAT (P<0.05). Furthermore, BMI, ESS and CAT were independent risk factors for 
OSA in COPD patients (P<0.05). Compared with mild or moderate COPD cases, 
patients with severe COPD (FEV(1)%<50%) had a lower risk of having OSA 
(β=-0.459, OR=0.632, 95% CI 0.401-0.997, P=0.048). Conclusions: Compared to COPD 
patients with AHI ≤ 15 events/h, OSA-COPD overlap patients (AHI>15 events/h) had 
a worse quality of life, more daytime sleepiness and higher prevalence of 
hypertension. BMI, ESS and CAT were independent risk factors for AHI>15 OSA in 
patients with COPD. The risk of having OSA in severe COPD patients was lower 
than cases with mild or moderate COPD.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨慢性阻塞性肺疾病（慢阻肺）合并阻塞性睡眠呼吸暂停（OSA）的临床特点，分析慢阻肺重叠OSA的危险因素。 方法： 
前瞻性对431例慢阻肺患者进行多导睡眠监测，其中男388例，女43例，平均年龄（67±9）岁。根据监测结果，以AHI≤15次/h为慢阻肺组（151/431），其中男141例，女10例，平均年龄（67±9）岁；AHI>15次/h为合并OSA组（280/431），其中男247例，女33例，平均年龄（68±9）岁。比较两组的临床特点，采用单变量和多变量logistic回归分析慢阻肺合并OSA的危险因素。 
结果： 
两组患者在性别构成、呼吸困难量表评分、入组前1年急性加重次数、住院次数、合并冠心病、肺源性心脏病及糖尿病等差异均无统计学意义（均P>0.05）。合并OSA组的年龄、体重指数[（24±4）kg/m(2)]、颈围[38（36，40）cm]、吸烟指数[41（27，55）包年]、慢阻肺评估测试评分（CAT）[19（15，23）分]、FEV(1)[1.4（0.9，2.0）L]、FEV(1)占预计值%[56（37，75）%]、FEV(1)/FVC[50（39，62）%]及合并高血压的比例（67/151）均高于慢阻肺组[（22±3）kg/m(2)、37（36，38）cm、40（25，55）包年、17（14，20）分、1.2（0.8，1.6）L、46（30，62）%、41（30，52）%、40/280]；病程[4（1，7）年]及重度慢阻肺比例（61/151）低于慢阻肺组[5（2，8）年、158/280，均P<0.05]。合并OSA组Charlson合并症指数、Epworth嗜睡量表（ESS）评分、睡眠呼吸暂停临床评分（SACS）均高于慢阻肺组（均P<0.05）。单因素分析结果显示，体重指数、颈围、ESS、SACS以及CAT评分均为慢阻肺合并OSA的危险因素，其中体重指数、ESS、CAT评分为慢阻肺合并OSA的独立危险因素。重度慢阻肺患者较轻、中度慢阻肺患者合并OSA的风险更低（β=-0.459，OR值为0.632，95% 
CI：0.401~ 0.997，P=0.048）。 结论： 
慢阻肺合并OSA患者的生活质量更差，日间嗜睡更明显，合并高血压更多；体重指数、ESS及CAT评分为慢阻肺合并OSA的独立危险因素；重度慢阻肺患者比轻、中度患者合并OSA的风险更低。.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.1001-0939.2019.11.009
PMID: 31694093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2019 Jun;20(9):1075-1085. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2019.1603292. Epub 2019 Apr 14.

Evaluating fluticasone furoate + vilanterol for the treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Lal C(1), Strange C(1).

Author information:
(1)a Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine , Medical University 
of South Carolina , Charleston , SC , USA.

Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β-2 agonists (ICS/LABA) combination inhalers 
have been a lifeline for a generation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) and asthma patients. Fluticasone furoate and Vilanterol (FF/VI) as a 
once-daily ICS/LABA combination have an extensive clinical trial and real-world 
data to support its use in COPD patients. Areas covered: The authors provide 
pharmacological profiles of fluticasone furoate, vilanterol and the FF/VI fixed 
dose combination. Salient clinical trials evaluating efficacy and safety of the 
FF/VI combination, and studies demonstrating the impact on COPD exacerbation 
risk and mortality are also discussed. Expert opinion: ICS/LABA combinations 
provide bronchodilation and decrease the frequency of COPD exacerbations. 
Individualizing treatment of each COPD patient based on unique phenotypes will 
maximize chances of therapeutic responsiveness. Asthma-COPD overlap (ACO), 
patients with sputum and/or blood eosinophilia, patients with a brisk 
bronchodilator response, and patients with frequent exacerbations are more 
likely to show a therapeutic response to ICS than populations who have none of 
these features. FF/VI will likely remain a popular ICS/LBA combination to treat 
COPD, as a once-daily inhaled therapy delivered via the Ellipta device popular 
with COPD patients, with extensive clinical trial and real-world data to support 
its use.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2019.1603292
PMID: 30983423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Clin Respir J. 2019 Jun;13(6):355-367. doi: 10.1111/crj.13016. Epub 2019 Mar 24.

Diagnosis and management of asthma, COPD and asthma-COPD overlap among primary 
care physicians and respiratory/allergy specialists: A global survey.

Jenkins C(1)(2), FitzGerald JM(3), Martinez FJ(4), Postma DS(5), Rennard 
S(6)(7), van der Molen T(8), Gardev A(9), Genofre E(10), Calverley P(11).

Author information:
(1)The George Institute for Global Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Concord Hospital, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Institute for Heart and Lung Health, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, New York-Presbyterian 
Hospital, Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Tuberculosis, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(6)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, Nebraska.
(7)Early Clinical Development, IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(8)Department of Primary Care, University Medical Centre Groningen, University 
of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(9)Global Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(10)Global Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(11)Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap (ACO) 
is a heterogenous condition with clinical features shared by both asthma and 
COPD.
OBJECTIVES: This online global survey of respiratory/allergy specialists and 
primary care practitioners (PCPs) was performed to understand current clinical 
approaches to the differential diagnosis and management of asthma, COPD and ACO.
METHODS: Respondents were recruited through: (a) a global online physician 
respondent community (49,980 PCPs and 7205 specialists); (b) market research 
agents; (c) experts; (d) professional societies; (e) colleague invitation. 
Respondents were presented with a survey including hypothetical clinical 
scenarios of diagnostic uncertainty to identify management approaches.
RESULTS: 891 responses (447 PCPs and 444 specialists) were collected across 13 
countries. Reported features used for diagnosis of asthma and COPD were 
consistent with practice guidelines, but there was variability in those selected 
for ACO diagnosis. Features typically selected by specialists focused on 
spirometry/history, while PCPs focused on previous treatment/symptoms. Most 
respondents could correctly diagnose patients with features of ACO; however, 
features selected for theoretical diagnosis were often different to those 
selected in the case scenarios. Additionally, treatment selection was often 
inconsistent with guidelines, with over half of respondents not recommending 
inhaled corticosteroids in a patient with ACO and dominant features of asthma.
CONCLUSION: While most PCPs and respiratory/allergy specialists can reach a 
working diagnosis of ACO, there remains uncertainty around which diagnostic 
features are most important and what constitutes optimal management. It is 
imperative that clinical studies including patients with ACO are initiated, 
allowing the generation of evidence-based management strategies.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13016
PMID: 30825365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Turk J Med Sci. 2019 Jun 18;49(3):802-808. doi: 10.3906/sag-1811-22.

Does hand grip strength decrease in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
exacerbation? A cross-sectional study.

Turan Z(1), Özyemişçi Taşkıran Ö(1), Erden Z(2), Köktürk N(3), Kaymak Karataş 
G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Medicine, Koç 
University, İstanbul, Turkey
(2)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Balıkesir Ayvalık State 
Hospital, Balıkesir, Turkey
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Gazi University, 
Ankara, Turkey
(4)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Medicine, Gazi 
University, Ankara, Turkey

BACKGROUND/AIM: Respiratory and peripheral muscle strength are reduced in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There is a well-known correlation 
between handgrip strength (HGS) and strenght extremity muscles. Our aim in this 
study was to measure HGS and investigate the related factors in COPD patients 
with exacerbation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Subjects with COPD exacerbation (n = 101) and stable COPD 
(n = 22), and subjects without COPD (n = 201), were enrolled in this study. Age, 
sex, and body mass index were similar. HGS was measured using a Vigorimeter. 
Pulmonary function tests and 6-min walk tests were performed.
RESULTS: The mean HGS was significantly lower in subjects with COPD exacerbation 
than those with stable COPD and subjects without COPD. The mean HGS was similar 
between stable COPD and non-COPD subjects. The mean 6-min walk distance (6MWD) 
was significantly lower in subjects with COPD exacerbation than stable COPD. 
There was a significant correlation between HGS and 6MWD but no correlation 
between HGS and pulmonary function tests.
CONCLUSION: In subjects with COPD exacerbation, the HGS was lower than that of 
stable COPD patients, and this difference was not explained by age, 
comorbidities, severity of obstruction, or smoking. Physical inactivity and 
steroid use during exacerbation might be possible factors affecting HGS. HGS was 
moderately correlated with 6MWD in cases of exacerbation. It may be used as a 
measure of muscle performance in COPD exacerbation, especially when the 6-min 
walk test cannot be performed.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License.

DOI: 10.3906/sag-1811-22
PMCID: PMC7018388
PMID: 31190519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: none declared


57. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 9;14:199-210. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S184127. eCollection 2019.

A randomized trial to determine the impact of indacaterol/glycopyrronium on 
nighttime oxygenation and symptoms in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD: the 
DuoSleep study.

Lehmann S(1)(2), Ringbæk T(3), Løkke A(4), Grote L(5), Hedner J(6), Lindberg 
E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Norwegian Competence Center for Sleep 
Disorders, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 
sverre.lehmann@helse-bergen.no.
(2)Section of Thoracic Medicine, Department of Clinical Science, University of 
Bergen, Bergen, Norway, sverre.lehmann@helse-bergen.no.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Respiratory Diseases and Allergy, Aarhus University Hospital, 
Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sahlgrenska 
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Sleep and Wake Disorders, 
University of Gothenburg and Pulmonary Medicine, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)Department of Medical Sciences, Respiratory, Allergy and Sleep Research, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

PURPOSE: This study investigated the effect of dual bronchodilation with the 
long-acting β-receptor agonist/long-acting muscarinic antagonist combination, 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY), on nighttime oxygenation, lung function, 
sleep quality, and symptoms in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a 4-week, double-blind, multicenter, 
placebo-controlled, two-period crossover study. Patients were randomized in a 
1:1 ratio to receive IND/GLY 110/50 µg once daily or matching placebo. The 
primary objective was to evaluate the effect of treatment with IND/GLY on mean 
nighttime oxygenation, compared with placebo. The secondary objective was to 
determine the time spent <90% in blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) compared with 
placebo. Exploratory objectives were to assess the effect of IND/GLY, compared 
with placebo, on sleep quality measured by the Medical Outcomes Study (MOS) 
Sleep Scale and the COPD and Asthma Sleep Impact Scale (CASIS) questionnaires 
and on symptoms assessed by COPD Assessment Test (CAT) questionnaire.
RESULTS: In total, 38 patients were randomized (n=22, IND/GLY; n=16, placebo). 
The change in nighttime oxygenation (SpO2) was similar, and there was a 
comparable difference in time spent <90% SpO2 between IND/GLY and placebo. 
Increases from baseline for the difference between IND/GLY and placebo for 
trough FEV1, FVC, and inspiratory capacity (P<0.05) were seen, with a 
corresponding reduction in residual volume and functional residual capacity 
(P<0.05). IND/GLY treatment showed an improvement in scores for CAT (P=0.0208), 
CASIS, and the MOS Sleep Scale measures, Sleep Problems Index I, Sleep Problems 
Index II (P=0.0315), Sleep Adequacy, Sleep Disturbance Scale, Somnolence Scale, 
and Short of Breath Scale (P=0.0031).
CONCLUSION: In this study, IND/GLY 110/50 µg once daily improved symptoms, sleep 
quality, and lung function, but showed no effect on nighttime oxygenation in 
patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S184127
PMCID: PMC6330967
PMID: 30666100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr Lehmann reports fees to employer 
and other support from Novartis, during the conduct of the study. Dr Løkke 
reports, other than from Novartis during the conduct of the study, personal fees 
and nonfinancial support from Astra-Zeneca; grants, personal fees, and 
nonfinancial support from Boehringer Ingelheim; personal fees and nonfinancial 
support from GlaxoSmithKline; personal fees and nonfinancial support from 
Novartis; personal fees and nonfinancial support from Chiesi; and grants, 
personal fees, and nonfinancial support from Pfizer, outside the submitted work. 
The institution of Dr Grote received payments under the clinical trial agreement 
with Novartis during the conduct of the study. Dr Hedner reports no financial 
conflict of interest; he has one patent related to pharmacological therapy in 
sleep apnea pending and one issued. The authors report no other conflicts of 
interest in this work.


58. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2019 Feb;25(2):205-217. doi: 
10.18553/jmcp.2019.25.2.205.

Health Care Resource Utilization and Exacerbation Rates in Patients with COPD 
Stratified by Disease Severity in a Commercially Insured Population.

Wallace AE(1), Kaila S(2), Bayer V(2), Shaikh A(2), Shinde MU(1), Willey VJ(1), 
Napier MB(3), Singer JR(1).

Author information:
(1)1 HealthCore, Wilmington, Delaware.
(2)2 Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Ridgefield, Connecticut.
(3)3 Anthem, Indianapolis, Indiana.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of 
morbidity and mortality and is associated with substantial economic burden. 
There is a lack of data regarding COPD outcomes and costs in a real-world 
setting, particularly by Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) severity.
OBJECTIVES: To (a) characterize a commercially insured U.S. population with COPD 
and (b) assess prevalence of exacerbations, health care resource utilization 
(HCRU), costs, and treatment patterns in a cohort of patients with confirmed 
COPD, overall and stratified by GOLD stage.
METHODS: This retrospective observational cohort study used administrative 
claims data from the HealthCore Integrated Research Database to identify 
patients with ≥ 1 inpatient, emergency room (ER), or office visit claim for COPD 
between January 1, 2012, and November 30, 2013, and continuous enrollment for 1 
year before and 2 years after the first COPD diagnosis date. Patients with a 
spirometry claim within 12 months were eligible for medical record abstraction 
to confirm COPD diagnosis (forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1]/forced 
vital capacity ratio < 0.7) and GOLD 1-4 classification (based on 
postbronchodilator FEV1 percent predicted). HCRU, costs, treatment patterns, and 
rate of moderate/severe exacerbation were identified from diagnosis up to 24 
months. Outcomes were analyzed by univariate analysis stratified by GOLD 
classification. Multivariable analysis was conducted to assess associations 
between GOLD classification and outcomes of interest.
RESULTS: 53,484 patients newly diagnosed with COPD were identified who met 
initial inclusion criteria: 14,293 (27%) had a qualifying spirometry claim, and 
1,505 had confirmed COPD (GOLD 1, 333 [22%]; GOLD 2, 823 [55%]; GOLD 3, 317 
[21%]; GOLD 4, 32 [2%]). Patients with greater disease severity had higher rates 
of moderate/severe COPD exacerbations (GOLD 1 and 2, 40.4 and 48.9 per 100 
person-years, respectively; GOLD 3 and 4, 83.6 and 89.1 per 100 person-years, 
respectively). All-cause and COPD-related inpatient admissions, COPD-related 
office visits, and COPD-related ER visits were more prevalent with more severe 
GOLD classification. Mean annual COPD-related medical costs increased with GOLD 
classification ($5,945 for GOLD 1 patients, $18,070 for GOLD 4). COPD 
maintenance medication was filled by 42%, 56%, 73%, and 75% of patients in GOLD 
1-4 (57% overall), respectively; combination corticosteroid/long-acting 
beta2-agonist inhalers were the most commonly used medication, regardless of 
GOLD classification. Patients with more severe disease had greater adherence 
(range 44%-68% of days covered for GOLD 1-4) and persistence (range 107-209 days 
for GOLD 1-4).
CONCLUSIONS: Trends toward increases in exacerbations, HCRU, and costs were 
observed as airflow limitation worsened. Adherence and persistence with COPD 
maintenance therapy was suboptimal even with severe disease.
DISCLOSURES: This study was supported by Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals 
(Ridgefield, CT), which was given the opportunity to review the manuscript for 
medical and scientific accuracy, as well as intellectual property 
considerations. Willey and Singer are employees of HealthCore (parent company 
Anthem), which received funding from Boehringer Ingelheim to complete this 
study. Wallace and Shinde were employed by HealthCore at the time of this study. 
Wallace and Singer report stock ownership in Anthem. Napier is an employee of 
Anthem. Kaila, Bayer, and Shaikh are employees of Boehringer Ingelheim 
Pharmaceuticsls. Portions of this research were presented at the following 
conferences: (a) A. Wallace, S. Kaila, V. Zubek, A. Shaikh, M. Shinde, V. 
Willey, M. Napier, and J. Singer, Healthcare resource utilization, costs, and 
exacerbation rates in patients with COPD stratified by GOLD airflow limitation 
classification in a US commercially insured population, presented at AMCP Nexus 
2017; October 16-19, 2017; Dallas, TX; and (b) A.E. Wallace, V. Zubek, S. Kaila, 
A. Shaikh, M. Shinde, V. Willey, M.B. Napier, and J.R. Singer, Real-world 
treatment patterns among newly diagnosed COPD patients according to GOLD airflow 
limitation severity classification in a U.S. commercially insured/Medicare 
Advantage population, presented at CHEST 2017 Annual Meeting; October 
28-November 1, 2017; Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2019.25.2.205
PMID: 30698096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2019 Jan;25(1):94-100. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000534.

Breathomics and treatable traits for chronic airway diseases.

Brinkman P(1), Zee AM(1), Wagener AH(2).

Author information:
(1)Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Department of Respiratory Medicine, 
Meibergdreef 9.
(2)Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Pediatrics, De 
Boelelaan 1117, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The long-term management goals of the inflammatory airway 
diseases asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are similar and 
focus on symptom control and reduction of exacerbation frequency and severity. 
Treatable traits have recently been postulated as a management concept which 
complements the traditional diagnostic labels 'asthma' and 'COPD', thereby 
focusing on therapy targeted to a patients' individual disease-associated 
characteristics. Exhaled volatile organic compounds (VOCs) may be utilized as 
noninvasive biomarker for disease activity or manifestation in asthma and COPD. 
In this review, we provide an overview of the current achievements concerning 
exhaled breath analysis in the field of uncontrolled chronic airways diseases.
RECENT FINDINGS: Monitoring of (airway) inflammation and identification of 
(molecular) phenotypic characteristics in asthma and COPD through exhaled VOC 
analysis by either mass spectrometry (MS) based or sensor-driven electronic nose 
technology (eNose) seems to be feasible, however pending confirmation could 
hamper the valorization of breathomics into clinical tests.
SUMMARY: Exhaled VOC analysis and the management of asthma and COPD through the 
concept of pulmonary treatable traits are an interesting match. To develop 
exhaled breath analysis into an added value for pulmonary treatable traits, 
multicentre studies are required following international standards for study 
populations, sampling methods and analytical strategies enabling external 
validation.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000534
PMID: 30325789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Asthma. 2019 Dec;56(12):1325-1333. doi: 10.1080/02770903.2018.1541351. Epub 
2019 Jan 29.

Outpatient pulmonary rehabilitation for severe asthma with fixed airway 
obstruction: Comparison with COPD.

Bellocq A(1)(2), Gaspard W(3), Couffignal C(4), Vigan M(4), Guerder A(5), Ambard 
J(6), Caruana S(6), Similowski T(5), Garcia G(7), Taillé C(8).

Author information:
(1)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière 
Charles Foix, Service d'Explorations Fonctionnelles de la Respiration, de 
l'Exercice et de la Dyspnée du Département R3S, Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, UMRS1158, Paris, France.
(3)Service des Maladies Respiratoires, Hôpital d'Instruction des Armées Percy, 
Clamart, France.
(4)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Department of Epidemiology, 
Biostatistic and Clinical Research, Bichat Hospital, Paris, France.
(5)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière 
Charles Foix, Service de Pneumologie et de Réanimation Médicale du Département 
R3S, Paris, France.
(6)Réseau Recup'Air, Agence Régionale de Santé Ile de France, Paris, France.
(7)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital de Bicêtre, Service de 
Pneumologie, Le Kremlin-Bicetre, France.
(8)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Bichat, DHU FIRE, Service de 
Pneumologie, INSERM UMR1152, Université Paris Diderot, Labex Inflamex, Paris, 
France.

Background: The benefit of exercise has been demonstrated in asthma, but the 
role of pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) in people with severe asthma, especially 
with airway obstruction, has been less investigated. The activity limitation 
mechanisms differ in asthma and COPD, so the effect of a PR program not specific 
to asthma is unclear. Methods: We retrospectively compared the effect of an 
ambulatory PR program in nonsmoking patients with severe asthma and airway 
obstruction (FEV1/FVC ratio <70% and FEV1 < 80% measured twice, not under an 
exacerbation) and sex-, age-, FEV1-, and BMI-matched COPD controls. Results: We 
included 29 patients, each with asthma and COPD. Airway obstruction was moderate 
(median FEV1 57% [44-64]). VO2 at peak was higher for asthma than COPD patients 
(19.0 [15.7-22.2] vs 16.1 [15.3-19.6] ml.min-1.kg-1, p = 0.05). After PR, asthma 
and COPD groups showed a significant and similar increase in constant work 
cycling test of 378 [114-831] s and 377 [246-702] s. Changes in Hospital Anxiety 
and Depression Scale (HAD) total score were similar (-2.5 [-7.0 to 0.0] vs -2.0 
[-5.0 to 2.0], p > 0.05). Quality of life on the St. George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ) was significantly improved in both groups (-14.0 [-17.7 to 
-2.0], p < 0.005 and -8.3 [-13.0 to -3.6], p < 0.0001). Conclusion: Outpatient 
PR is feasible and well tolerated in patients with severe asthma with fixed 
airway obstruction. A nondedicated program strongly improves HAD and SGRQ scores 
and constant work-rate sub-maximal cycling, with similar amplitude as with COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/02770903.2018.1541351
PMID: 30693816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Respir Res. 2019 Mar 26;20(1):60. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1027-9.

Impact of prior and concurrent medication on exacerbation risk with long-acting 
bronchodilators in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a post hoc analysis.

Naya I(1), Tombs L(2), Lipson DA(3)(4), Boucot I(5), Compton C(5).

Author information:
(1)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, 
TW8 9GS, UK. ian.p.naya@gsk.com.
(2)Precise Approach Ltd, contingent worker on assignment at GSK, Stockley Park 
West, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(3)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, Collegeville, PA, USA.
(4)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(5)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, 
TW8 9GS, UK.

BACKGROUND: Symptomatic patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) and low exacerbation risk still have disease instability, which can be 
improved with better bronchodilation. We evaluated two long-acting 
bronchodilators individually and in combination on reducing exacerbation risk 
and the potential impact of concurrent medication in these patients.
METHODS: Integrated post hoc intent-to-treat (ITT) analysis of data from two 
large 24-week, randomized placebo (PBO)-controlled trials (NCT01313637, 
NCT01313650). Symptomatic patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD 
with/without an exacerbation history were randomized (2:3:3:3) to once-daily: 
PBO, umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI 62.5/25 μg [NCT01313650] or 125/25 μg 
[NCT01313637]), UMEC (62.5 [NCT01313650] or 125 μg [NCT01313637]) or VI (25 μg) 
via the ELLIPTA inhaler. Medication subgroups were segmented by treatment status 
at screening: a) maintenance-naïve or on maintenance medications, b) inhaled 
corticosteroid [ICS]-free or ICS-treated, c) low or high albuterol use based on 
median run-in use (< 3.6 or ≥ 3.6 puffs/day). Time to first moderate/severe 
exacerbation (Cox proportional hazard model) and change from baseline in trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1; mixed model repeated measures) were 
analyzed. Safety was also assessed.
RESULTS: Of 3021 patients (ITT population; UMEC/VI: n = 816; UMEC: n = 825; VI: 
n = 825; PBO: n = 555), 36% had a recent exacerbation history, 33% were 
maintenance-naïve, 51% were ICS-free. Mean baseline albuterol use was 5.1 
puffs/day. In the ITT population, UMEC/VI, UMEC, and VI reduced the risk of a 
first exacerbation versus PBO by 58, 44, and 39%, respectively (all p < 0.05). 
UMEC/VI provided significant risk reductions versus PBO in all subgroups. VI had 
no benefit versus PBO in maintenance-naïve, ICS-free, and low rescue use 
patients and was significantly less effective than UMEC/VI in these subgroups. 
UMEC had no significant benefit versus PBO in maintenance-naïve and ICS-free 
patients. All bronchodilators improved FEV1 versus PBO, and UMEC/VI 
significantly improved FEV1 versus both monotherapies across all populations 
studied (p < 0.05). All bronchodilators were similarly well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that UMEC/VI reduces exacerbation risk versus PBO 
more consistently across medication subgroups than UMEC or VI, particularly in 
patients with no/low concurrent medication use. Confirmed prospectively, these 
findings may support first-line use of dual bronchodilation therapy in 
symptomatic low-risk patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1027-9
PMCID: PMC6434823
PMID: 30914064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
clinical studies included in this pooled analysis were carried out according to 
the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and received appropriate ethical 
approval. Informed consent was obtained for all individual participants included 
in the studies used as the basis for this pooled analysis. CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: IN, DAL, IB, and CC are 
employees of GSK and hold stocks and shares in GSK. LT is a contingent worker on 
assignment at GSK. ELLIPTA is owned by/licensed to the GlaxoSmithKline group of 
companies. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


62. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2019 Jun 12;42(6):426-431. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1001-0939.2019.06.005.

[Blood eosinophils: a biomarker of response to glucocorticoids and increased 
readmissions in severe hospitalized exacerbations of COPD].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Xue J(1), Cui YN, Chen P, Cai S, Chen L, Dai ZS, Chen Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, the Second Xiangya 
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410011, China.

Objective: To compare the clinical characteristics of patients with acute 
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) by different 
levels of blood eosinophil (EOS) count and to investigate the predictive value 
of the response to glucocorticoid treatment and the readmission rate in the 
patients with higher blood eosinophils. Methods: A total of 120 patients with 
AECOPD were admitted to the Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine 
in The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University from January 01, 2017 
to December 31, 2017. Patients were divided into two groups according to their 
admission blood eosinophil fractions. Patients with EOS%≥2% were in the EOS 
group (n=56) , while patients with EOS%<2% were in the Non-EOS group (n=64) . 
The clinical characteristics, hospitalization treatments especially the 
glucocorticoid treatment response were compared, and the risk of severe acute 
exacerbation of the two groups including the 12-month COPD-related readmission, 
and time to first COPD-related readmission were also compared. Results: Compared 
with the Non-EOS group, the EOS group had lower values of white blood cell (WBC) 
, neutrophil fraction (N%) , blood neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) , and 
C-reactive protein (CRP) . The EOS group also required shorter course of 
antibiotic treatment [8 (6-10) and 9 (7-11) , P=0.033]. In 
glucocorticoid-treated patients (n=82) , the EOS group had significantly 
alleviated symptoms than the Non-EOS group (patients withδCAT≥2 were 86.8% and 
68.2%, respectively, P=0.046) , and the duration of hospitalization of the EOS 
group was shorter [9 (7-11) and 10 (9 to 13) , P=0.042]. Patients with 
glucocorticoid treatment in the EOS group had significantly alleviated symptoms 
than those without glucocorticoid treatment (patients with δCAT ≥ 2 were 86.8% 
and 61.1%, respectively, P=0.040) . The follow-up one year after discharge 
showed a higher risk of severe acute exacerbation in the EOS group [Adjust OR 
2.67 (1.10-6.46), P=0.030; HR: 1.57 (1.02-2.40), P=0.040]. Conclusion: The blood 
eosinophil levels were useful in predicting the AECOPD patients' response to 
glucocorticoid treatment and the risk of severe acute exacerbations.

Publisher: 目的： 
分析不同水平血嗜酸粒细胞（EOS）慢性阻塞性肺疾病急性加重期（AECOPD）患者的临床特点，探讨血EOS对AECOPD激素治疗反应性和再入院的预测价值。 方法： 
纳入2017年1月1日至12月31日在中南大学湘雅二医院呼吸与危重症学科住院的120例AECOPD患者，以入院血常规中EOS百分比（EOS%）分为两组，EOS%≥2%为EOS组（56例），EOS%<2%为非EOS组（64例）。对比分析两组患者临床特点、糖皮质激素治疗反应性以及再发重度急性加重风险。 
结果： 
EOS组与非EOS组比较，白细胞、中性粒细胞百分比（N%）、中性粒细胞与淋巴细胞比值（NLR），C-反应蛋白（CRP）较低，使用抗生素疗程更短[分别为8（6~10）d和9（7~11）d，P=0.033]；应用糖皮质激素治疗患者EOS组较非EOS组症状改善更明显（δCAT≥2分别为86.8%和68.2%，P=0.046），住院时间更短[分别为9（7~11）和10（9~13），P=0.042]；EOS组患者中糖皮质激素治疗患者较未使用患者症状改善更明显（δCAT≥2分别为86.8%和61.1%，P=0.040）。出院后1年随访结果显示，EOS组重度急性加重发生风险更高[校正OR值为2.67（1.10~6.46），P=0.030；HR为1.57（1.02~2.40），P=0.040]。 
结论： 慢性阻塞性肺疾病急性加重期血嗜酸粒细胞水平对预测糖皮质激素治疗反应性和再发重度急性加重风险具有一定的参考价值。.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.1001-0939.2019.06.005
PMID: 31189228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 23;14:2993-3002. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S220861. eCollection 2019.

Long-Term Safety and Efficacy of Budesonide/Glycopyrrolate/Formoterol Fumarate 
Metered Dose Inhaler Formulated Using Co-Suspension Delivery Technology in 
Japanese Patients with COPD.

Ichinose M(1), Fukushima Y(2), Inoue Y(3), Hataji O(4), Ferguson GT(5), Rabe 
KF(6), Hayashi N(7), Okada H(7), Takikawa M(7), Bourne E(8), Ballal S(9), 
DeAngelis K(10), Aurivillius M(11), Reisner C(9), Dorinsky P(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Fukuwa Clinic, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization, Kinki-Chuo Chest 
Medical Center, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Respiratory Center, Matsusaka Municipal Hospital, Matsusaka, Japan.
(5)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(6)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf and Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Airway 
Research Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Großhansdorf, Germany.
(7)AstraZeneca K.K., Osaka, Japan.
(8)AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.
(9)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(10)Formerly of AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.
(11)AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler 
(BGF MDI) is a triple fixed-dose combination for COPD. The long-term safety of 
triple therapy for COPD has not been investigated in Japanese patients. In this 
28-week extension study (NCT03262012), we investigated the long-term safety and 
tolerability of BGF MDI in Japanese patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD 
who completed the 24-week Phase III randomized, double-blind, multicenter KRONOS 
study (NCT02497001).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients randomized to BGF MDI 320/18/9.6 μg, 
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF) MDI 18/9.6 μg, budesonide/formoterol 
fumarate (BFF) MDI 320/9.6 μg, or budesonide/formoterol fumarate dry powder 
inhaler (BUD/FORM DPI) 400/12 μg twice-daily in KRONOS continued treatment for 
up to 28 additional weeks. Safety was evaluated over 52 weeks via adverse event 
(AE) monitoring, electrocardiograms, clinical laboratory testing, and vital sign 
measurements.
RESULTS: The safety population included 416 patients who received BGF MDI 
(n=139), GFF MDI (n=138), BFF MDI (n=70), or BUD/FORM DPI (n=69). 
Treatment-emergent AE (TEAE) rates were similar across treatment groups (range: 
82.6-82.9%). The most frequent TEAEs overall were nasopharyngitis (32.2%) and 
bronchitis (9.9%). The incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events was low 
across groups (range: 0.0-2.9%). Over 52 weeks, the incidence of confirmed 
pneumonia was 9.4% (BGF MDI), 3.6% (GFF MDI), 5.7% (BFF MDI), and 2.9% (BUD/FORM 
DPI); in the 28-week extension period, rates were comparable across groups 
(range: 2.9-5.7%). Six deaths were reported (0.7-2.2% per group); none were 
considered treatment-related. No clinically meaningful trends were observed in 
electrocardiograms, laboratory parameters, or vital signs over time in any of 
the treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: All treatments were well tolerated over 52 weeks, and the safety 
profile of BGF MDI was generally comparable to dual long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) and inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS)/LABA therapies. These findings support the long-term tolerability of BGF 
MDI in Japanese patients with COPD.

© 2019 Ichinose et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S220861
PMCID: PMC6934178
PMID: 31920296

Conflict of interest statement: MI reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, 
during the conduct of the study; and personal fees from Kyorin, Nippon 
Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novartis Pharma, outside of the submitted work. YI 
reports personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Nobelpharma, and Shionogi & Co. Ltd, outside of the submitted work. OH reports 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novartis 
Pharma; and research funding from AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novartis Pharma. GTF reports grants, personal 
fees, and non-financial support from AstraZeneca during the conduct of the 
study; grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Pearl – a member of the AstraZeneca Group, and 
Sunovion; grants and personal fees from Theravance; and personal fees from 
Circassia, GlaxoSmithKline, Innoviva, Mylan, and Verona, outside of the 
submitted work. KFR reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Pharmaceuticals, InterMune, Novartis, Sanofi, and 
Teva; and grants from the Ministry of Education and Science, Germany, outside of 
the submitted work. NH, HO, and MT are employees of AstraZeneca K.K., Japan. EB, 
SB, MA, CR, and PD are employees of AstraZeneca. KdA is a former employee of 
AstraZeneca. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


64. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Nov;98(47):e17893. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000017893.

Characteristics and related factors of bronchiectasis in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Yu Q(1), Peng H(1), Li B(1), Qian H(1), Zhang H(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory and Critical Care Department.
(2)Radiology Department, Tianjin Chest Hospital, Tianjin, China.

The purpose of this study was to understand the incidence, clinical 
characteristics and related factors of bronchiectasis in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.From January 2015 to January 2017, 133 
patients with moderate to severe COPD admitted to our hospital were enrolled in 
the study. Bronchiectasis analysis was performed by high resolution CT of the 
chest, the clinical data of all patients were collected including increasing 
state of COPD, peripheral blood samples, pulmonary function, blood gas. And 
sputum samples were collected for detection of microorganisms.the patients were 
aged 70.18 ± 8.31 years, and 62.4% of the patients were male. FEV1 accounted for 
an estimated value of 37.91 ± 10.68%, and 104 (78.2%) were severe COPD, and 43 
(32.3%) had bronchiectasis. Bronchiectasis is mainly bilateral, multiple and 
columnar bronchiectasis. The most easily involved sites are the left lower lobe, 
left lingual lobe and right middle lobe. Bronchiectasis is associated with 
history of disease (P = .027), at least one hospitalization exacerbated by COPD 
in the past year (P = .025), and the separation of potential pathogenic 
microorganisms from sputum (P = .022). The most commonly isolated pathogen was 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P < .001).Bronchiectasis should be noted in patients 
with COPD who often suffer from exacerbation or repeated respiratory infections, 
especially in those who isolate P aeruginosa from respiratory specimens.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000017893
PMCID: PMC6882597
PMID: 31764784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Pharmacologic and Nonpharmacologic Therapies in Adult Patients With Exacerbation 
of COPD: A Systematic Review [Internet].

Dobler CC(1), Morrow AS(1), Farah MH(1), Beuschel B(1), Majzoub AM(1), Wilson 
ME(1), Hasan B(1), Seisa MO(1), Daraz L(1), Prokop LJ(1), Murad MH(1), Wang 
Z(1).

Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US); 2019 Oct. 
Report No.: 19(20)-EHC024-EF.
AHRQ Comparative Effectiveness Reviews.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic Evidence-based Practice Center

OBJECTIVES: To synthesize existing knowledge about the effectiveness and harms 
of pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatments for exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (ECOPD).
DATA SOURCES: Embase®, Epub Ahead of Print, In-Process & Other Non-Indexed 
Citations, MEDLINE® Daily, MEDLINE, Cochrane Central Registrar of Controlled 
Trials, Ovid Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, and Scopus from database 
inception to January 2, 2019.
REVIEW METHODS: We included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that evaluated 
pharmacologic intervention or nonpharmacologic interventions for ECOPD. The 
strength of evidence (SOE) was graded for critical final health outcomes.
RESULTS: We included 98 RCTs (13,401 patients, mean treatment duration 9.9 days, 
mean followup 3.7 months). Final health outcomes, including mortality, 
resolution of exacerbation, hospital readmissions, repeat exacerbations, and 
need for intubation, were infrequently evaluated and often showed no 
statistically significant differences between groups. Antibiotic therapy 
increases the clinical cure rate and reduces the clinical failure rate 
regardless of the severity of ECOPD (moderate SOE). There is insufficient 
evidence to support a particular antibiotic regimen. Oral and intravenous 
corticosteroids improve dyspnea and reduce the clinical failure rate (low SOE). 
Despite the ubiquitous use of inhaled bronchodilators in ECOPD, we found only a 
small number of trials that assessed lung function tests, and not final health 
outcomes. The evidence is insufficient to support the effect of aminophyllines, 
magnesium sulfate, mucolytics, inhaled corticosteroids, inhaled antibiotics, 
5-lipoxygenase inhibitor, and statins on final health outcomes. Titrated oxygen 
reduces mortality compared with high flow oxygen (low SOE). Low SOE suggested 
benefit from some nonpharmacologic interventions such as chest physiotherapy 
using vibration/percussion/massage or breathing technique (on dyspnea), 
resistance training (on dyspnea and quality of life), early pulmonary 
rehabilitation commenced before hospital discharge during the initial most acute 
phase of exacerbation rather than the convalescence period (on dyspnea) and 
whole body vibration training (on quality of life). Vitamin D supplementation 
may improve quality of life (low SOE).
CONCLUSIONS: Although chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a common 
condition, the evidence base for most interventions in ECOPD remains limited. 
Systemic antibiotics and corticosteroids are associated with improved outcomes 
in mild and moderate to severe ECOPD. Titrated oxygen reduces mortality. Future 
research is required to assess the effectiveness of several emerging 
nonpharmacologic and dietary treatments.

PMID: 31657888


66. Arch Bronconeumol. 2019 Aug;55(8):414-420. doi: 10.1016/j.arbres.2019.02.004. 
Epub 2019 Mar 25.

Acute Exacerbation According to GOLD 2017 Categories in Patients with Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Kim J(1), Lee CH(2), Lee MG(3), Shin KC(4), Yoo KH(5), Lim SY(6), Na JO(7), Yoo 
CG(8), Jung KS(9), Lee SD(10); KOLD, KOCOSS investigators.

Author information:
(1)Center for Lung Cancer, Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer 
Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: kauri670@empal.com.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy & Critical Care Medicine, Hallym University 
Chuncheon Sacred Heart Hospital, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Pulmonology and Allergy, Regional Center for Respiratory Disease, 
Yeungnam University Medical Center, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Konkuk University Medical Center, Konkuk University School of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Cheonan Hospital, 
Cheonan-si, Republic of Korea.
(8)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea; Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(9)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Hallym 
University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University Medical School, Anyang, 
Republic of Korea.
(10)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: The association between GOLD categorizations and future 
exacerbations has not been fully investigated. This study elucidates whether the 
GOLD 2017 classification is associated with different future exacerbation risk 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) compared with the 
previous GOLD categorization. Another objective was to investigate the impacts 
of the symptoms and FEV1 on the predicted future exacerbation independently of 
previous exacerbation history.
METHODS: We analyzed patients from three prospective COPD cohorts (SNUH, KOCOSS, 
and KOLD) and evaluated the risk of moderate to severe exacerbation among 
different models, including GOLD grade (FEV1), GOLD 2011, and GOLD 2017.
RESULTS: In total, 611 COPD patients were included (36 from SNUH, 257 from 
KOCOSS, and 318 from KOLD). GOLD 2017 classification, excluding FEV1% for 
categorization criteria, showed no differences in future exacerbation risk 
compared with GOLD grade and GOLD 2011 based on c-statistics. Among those with 
no frequent exacerbation history and FEV1 ≥50%, the group with more symptoms was 
significantly associated with future exacerbations than the group with less 
symptoms. A lower FEV1 (FEV1 <50%) was not associated with a higher future 
exacerbation risk than a higher FEV1 (FEV1 ≥50%), regardless of prior 
exacerbation history and symptom group.
CONCLUSION: The GOLD 2017 classification was not different from GOLD grade and 
GOLD 2011 regarding the association with future exacerbation risk, and there 
were no significant differences in exacerbation risk according to FEV1%. This 
suggests that FEV1 might not be an important factor in future exacerbation risk. 
These results partly support the GOLD 2017 assessment tool.

Copyright © 2019 SEPAR. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arbres.2019.02.004
PMID: 30922610


67. Chest. 2020 Apr;157(4):846-855. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.11.007. Epub 2019 Nov 
22.

Comparative Effects of LAMA-LABA-ICS vs LAMA-LABA for COPD: Cohort Study in 
Real-World Clinical Practice.

Suissa S(1), Dell'Aniello S(2), Ernst P(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute - Jewish General 
Hospital; and the Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC, Canada. Electronic address: samy.suissa@mcgill.ca.
(2)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute - Jewish General 
Hospital; and the Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Triple therapy combinations of a long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA), a long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA), and an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) 
for COPD were studied in randomized trials and observational studies, with 
variable results. We compared the effectiveness and safety of triple therapy 
with a LAMA-LABA combination in a real-world clinical practice setting.
METHODS: We identified a cohort of patients with COPD during 2002 through 
2015, ≥ 55 years of age, from the UK's Clinical Practice Research Datalink. 
Patients initiating LAMA-LABA-ICS were matched 4:1 on time-conditional 
propensity scores with patients initiating LAMA-LABA, and followed for 1 year 
for the occurrence of a moderate or severe COPD exacerbation and severe 
pneumonia.
RESULTS: The cohort included 6,921 initiators of LAMA-LABA-ICS matched to 1,932 
initiators of LAMA-LABA. The adjusted hazard ratio (HR) of a COPD exacerbation 
associated with LAMA-LABA-ICS initiation compared with LAMA-LABA initiation was 
0.97 (95% CI, 0.87-1.08). For patients with blood eosinophil counts > 6%, the HR 
was 0.66 (95% CI, 0.46-0.94). For patients with two or more prior exacerbations, 
it was 0.83 (95% CI, 0.70-0.98). The incidence of severe pneumonia requiring 
hospitalization was increased with LAMA-LABA-ICS initiation (HR, 1.46; 95% CI, 
1.03-2.06).
CONCLUSIONS: In a real-world setting of COPD treatment, the triple combination 
of LAMA, LABA, and ICS inhalers is generally as effective as combining LAMA and 
LABA inhalers in preventing COPD exacerbations. However, with the possible 
exception of patients with significant eosinophilia or frequent exacerbators, a 
LAMA-LABA combination without ICS may be preferable because it is associated 
with fewer severe cases of pneumonia.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.11.007
PMID: 31759966


68. COPD. 2019 Feb;16(1):75-81. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1573888. Epub 2019 Feb 
21.

Perspectives on End-of-Life Treatment among Patients with COPD: A Multicenter, 
Cross-sectional Study in Japan.

Fuseya Y(1)(2), Muro S(1)(3), Sato S(1), Sato A(1), Tanimura K(1), Hasegawa 
K(1), Uemasu K(1), Hamakawa Y(1), Takahashi Y(4), Nakayama T(4), Sakai N(2), 
Fukui M(5), Kita H(6), Mio T(7), Mishima M(1), Hirai T(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine , Kyoto 
University , Kyoto , Japan.
(2)b Department of Respiratory Medicine , Japanese Red Cross Otsu Hospital , 
Otsu , Shiga , Japan.
(3)c Department of Respiratory Medicine , Nara Medical University , Kashihara , 
Nara , Japan.
(4)d Department of Health Informatics , Kyoto University School of Public Health 
, Kyoto , Japan.
(5)e Division of Respiratory Medicine , Respiratory Disease Center, Kitano 
Hospital , Osaka , Japan.
(6)f Department of Respiratory Medicine , Takatsuki Red Cross Hospital , 
Takatsuki , Osaka , Japan.
(7)g Department of Respiratory Disease , National Hospital Organization Kyoto 
Medical Center , Kyoto , Japan.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of mortality. 
Since patients with severe COPD may experience exacerbations and eventually face 
mortality, advanced care planning (ACP) has been increasingly emphasized in the 
recent COPD guidelines. We conducted a multicenter, cross-sectional study to 
survey the current perspectives of Japanese COPD patients toward ACP. 
"High-risk" COPD patients and their attending physicians were consecutively 
recruited. The patients' family configurations, understanding of COPD 
pathophysiology, current end-of-life care communication with physicians and 
family members, and preferences for invasive life-sustaining treatments 
including mechanical ventilation (MV) and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) 
were evaluated using a custom-made, structured, self-administered questionnaire. 
Attending physicians were also interviewed, and we evaluated the 
patient-physician agreement. Among the 224 eligible "high-risk" patients, 162 
participated. Half of the physicians (54.4%) thought they had communicated 
detailed information; however, only 19.4% of the COPD patients thought the 
physicians did so (κ score = 0.16). Less than 10% of patients wanted to receive 
invasive treatment (MV, 6.3% and CPR, 9.4%); interestingly, more than half 
marked their decision as "refer to the physician" (MV 42.5% and CPR 44.4%) or 
"refer to family" (MV, 13.8% and CPR, 14.4%). Patients with less knowledge of 
COPD were less likely to indicate that they had already made a decision. 
Although ACP is necessary to cope with severe COPD, Japanese "high-risk" COPD 
patients were unable to make a decision on their preferences for invasive 
treatments. Lack of disease knowledge and communication gaps between patients 
and physicians should be addressed as part of these patients' care.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1573888
PMID: 30788987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Chest. 2019 May;155(5):908-917. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.12.022. Epub 2019 Jan 
23.

Systemic Markers of Inflammation in Smokers With Symptoms Despite 
Preserved Spirometry in SPIROMICS.

Garudadri S(1), Woodruff PG(2), Han MK(3), Curtis JL(3), Barr RG(4), Bleecker 
ER(5), Bowler RP(6), Comellas A(7), Cooper CB(8), Criner G(9), Dransfield 
MT(10), Hansel NN(11), Paine R 3rd(12), Krishnan JA(13), Peters SP(14), Hastie 
AT(15), Martinez FJ(16), O'Neal WK(17), Couper DJ(18), Alexis NE(19), 
Christenson SA(2).

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH; Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy, and Sleep 
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA. Electronic 
address: sureshgarudadri@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy, and Sleep Medicine, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.
(4)Department of Medicine and Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University, 
New York, NY.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
(6)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA.
(8)School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(9)School of Medicine, Medicine/Pulmonary and Critical Care, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(10)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Alabama, Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(11)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
(12)Internal Medicine/Pulmonary and Critical Care, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, UT.
(13)Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy College of Medicine, University 
of Illinois, Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(14)Section on Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy & Immunologic Diseases, Wake 
Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC.
(15)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Wake Forest 
University, Winston-Salem, NC.
(16)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY.
(17)Marsico Lung Institute, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
(18)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
(19)Center for Environmental Medicine, Asthma and Lung Biology, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

Comment in
    Chest. 2019 May;155(5):886-887.

BACKGROUND: Chronic respiratory symptoms and exacerbation-like events are common 
among ever-smokers without airflow limitation on spirometry. The pathobiology of 
respiratory disease in this subgroup remains poorly defined, but may be due to 
underlying inflammation that overlaps with COPD or asthma. We hypothesized that 
symptoms, exacerbations, and functional measures of disease severity among 
smokers with preserved spirometry would be associated with markers of systemic 
inflammation, similar to what is reported in bone fide COPD, rather than 
elevated type 2 inflammation, which is often present in asthma.
METHODS: We measured inflammatory markers associated with COPD (C-reactive 
protein [CRP], fibrinogen, soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors [sTNFRSF1A 
and sTNFRSF1B], and blood/sputum neutrophils) and type 2 inflammation (IgE and 
blood/sputum eosinophils) in smokers with preserved spirometry 
(postbronchodilator FEV1/FVC ≥ 0.70) from the Subpopulations and Intermediate 
Outcome Measures In COPD Study (SPIROMICS). We evaluated the relationship of 
these markers with respiratory symptom burden (dichotomized by a COPD assessment 
test score cutoff of 10, diagnosis of chronic bronchitis), exacerbations, 
6-minute walk distance, and lung function on the basis of FEV1.
RESULTS: CRP was associated with increased symptom burden (on the basis of COPD 
assessment test score and diagnosis of chronic bronchitis) and a greater number 
of exacerbations in the year before study enrollment. sTNFRSF1A was associated 
with symptom burden on the basis of COPD assessment test score. CRP and 
sTNFRSF1A levels negatively correlated with 6-minute walk distance. IgE and 
eosinophils were not associated with these outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Markers of inflammation including CRP and sTNFRSF1A are enriched 
among symptomatic smokers with preserved spirometry, suggesting an overlap with 
the underlying pathophysiology of COPD.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.12.022
PMCID: PMC6533449
PMID: 30684474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Nov 5;14:2451-2460. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S218747. eCollection 2019.

A Cross-Sectional Study Assessing Appropriateness Of Inhaled Corticosteroid 
Treatment In Primary And Secondary Care Patients With COPD In Sweden.

Sulku J(1)(2), Janson C(3), Melhus H(4), Malinovschi A(5), Ställberg B(6), Bröms 
K(2)(6), Högman M(3), Lisspers K(6), Hammarlund-Udenaes M(1), Nielsen EI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(2)Centre for Research and Development, Uppsala University/Region Gävleborg, 
Gävle, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, Respiratory, Allergy and Sleep Research, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Osteoporosis, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Physiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Family Medicine and 
Preventive Medicine, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

PURPOSE: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are often more widely prescribed in the 
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) than what is 
recommended in the guidelines. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
appropriateness of ICS treatment in COPD patients using the algorithm proposed 
by the International Primary Care Respiratory Group (IPCRG) and to identify 
factors associated with ICS treatment.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Appropriateness of ICS therapy was studied with respect to 
concomitant asthma, history of exacerbations and blood eosinophils (B-Eos) in a 
Swedish cohort of primary and secondary care patients with COPD. Factors 
associated with ICS were investigated using multivariable logistic regression.
RESULTS: Triple treatment was found to be the most common treatment combination, 
used by 46% of the 561 included patients, and in total 63% were using ICS. When 
applying the IPCRG algorithm, there was a possible indication for 
discontinuation of ICS in 55% of the patients with ICS treatment. Of the 
patients not using ICS, 18% had an indication for starting such treatment. The 
strongest factors associated with ICS therapy were frequent exacerbations (aOR 
8.61, 95% CI 4.06, 20.67), secondary care contacts (aOR 6.99, 95% CI 2.48, 
25.28) and very severe airflow limitation (aOR 5.91, 95% CI 1.53, 26.58).
CONCLUSION: More than half of the COPD patients on ICS met the criteria where 
withdrawal of the treatment could be tried. There was, however, also a subgroup 
of patients not using ICS for whom there was an indication for starting ICS 
treatment. Patients using ICS were characterized by more frequent exacerbations 
and lower lung function.

© 2019 Sulku et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S218747
PMCID: PMC6842319
PMID: 31806954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JS has received a payment for an educational 
activity from Orion Pharma. CJ has received payments for educational activities 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Novartis and TEVA, and has 
served on advisory boards organized by AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and TEVA. BS has received honoraria for 
educational activities and lectures from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Meda and TEVA and has served on advisory boards 
organized by AstraZeneca, Novartis, GSK, Boehringer Ingelheim, TEVA and Meda. KL 
has received honoraria for educational activities and lectures from AstraZeneca, 
Novartis, TEVA, Chiesi and GlaxoSmithKline and has served on advisory boards 
organized by Novartis and Boehringer Ingelheim. No potential conflicts of 
interests were reported by any of the other authors.


71. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 13;14:391-401. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S173901. eCollection 2019.

When to use single-inhaler triple therapy in COPD: a practical approach for 
primary care health care professionals.

Gaduzo S(1), McGovern V(2), Roberts J(3), Scullion JE(4), Singh D(5).

Author information:
(1)Stockport NHS Foundation Trust, Stockport, UK.
(2)Belfast Trust, Belfast, UK.
(3)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.
(4)University Hospitals of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(5)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester University 
NHS Foundation Hospital Trust, Manchester, UK, dsingh@meu.org.uk.

While single-inhaler triple therapy (SITT) devices were not available when the 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease strategy and National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines were developed, two devices 
are now available in the UK. This paper offers practical, patient-focused advice 
to optimize placement of SITT in the management of COPD. A survey of UK health 
care professionals (HCPs) identified issues around, and attitudes toward, SITT, 
which informed a multidisciplinary expert panel's discussions. The survey 
confirmed the need to clarify the place of SITT in COPD management. The panel 
suggested three criteria, any one of which identifies a high-risk patient where 
escalation to triple therapy from monotherapy or double combination treatment is 
appropriate: 1) at least two exacerbations treated with oral corticosteroids, 
antibiotics, or both in the previous year; 2) at least one severe exacerbation 
that required hospital admission in the previous year; 3) one exacerbation a 
year on a repeated basis for 2 consecutive years. Appropriate 
non-pharmacological management is essential for all patients and should be 
considered before stepping up treatment. Regular review is essential. During 
each review, HCPs should consider stepping treatment up or down. If patients 
exacerbate despite adhering to triple therapy, an individualized approach should 
be considered if the inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) confers benefit or causes side 
effects. In this situation, the blood eosinophil count could aid decision 
making. ICSs should be continued when the history suggests that asthma overlaps 
with COPD. Training, counseling, and education should be individualized. HCPs 
should consider referral: 1) when there is limited response to treatment and 
persistent exacerbations; 2) where there is diagnostic uncertainty or suspected 
comorbidity; 3) whenever they feel "out of their depth." Overall, the panel 
concurred that when used correctly, SITT has the potential to improve adherence, 
symptom control, and quality of life, and reduce exacerbations. Studies using 
real-world evidence need to confirm these benefits.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S173901
PMCID: PMC6388781
PMID: 30863039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr S Gaduzo reports receiving 
consultancy fees for speaking at and chairing educational meetings and 
conferences on behalf of AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Limited, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer, and Novartis. Dr V McGovern reports accepting speaker 
fees, advisory panel fees, and conference sponsorship from the following 
pharmaceutical companies: Altana, AstraZeneca, Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Sharp & Dohme, NAPP, Novartis, Orion Pharma, and 
Pfizer. J Roberts reports receiving consultancy fees from AstraZeneca, Chiesi 
Limited, and GlaxoSmithKline. JE Scullion reports accepting honoraria or support 
from ADMIT, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Mundipharma, Mylan, NAPP, 
Nutricia, Orion Pharma, Roche, Teva, Trudell Medical, and UKIG. Professor D 
Singh reports receiving sponsorship to attend and speak at international 
meetings, honoraria for lecturing or attending advisory boards, and research 
grants from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Limited, Genentech, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, Johnson & Johnson, Merck, NAPP, Novartis, Pfizer, 
Skypharma, Takeda, Teva, Theravance, and Verona. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


72. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;13:1753466619843426. doi: 
10.1177/1753466619843426.

The once-daily fixed-dose combination of olodaterol and tiotropium in the 
management of COPD: current evidence and future prospects.

Derom E(1), Brusselle GG(2), Joos GF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ingang 12, 
Route 1404, Corneel Heymanslaan 10, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium.

Long-acting bronchodilators are the cornerstone of pharmacologic treatment of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Spiolto® or Stiolto® is a 
fixed-dose combination (FDC) containing two long-acting bronchodilators, the 
long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist tiotropium (TIO) and the long-acting 
β2-adrenoceptor agonist olodaterol (OLO), formulated in the Respimat® Soft Mist™ 
inhaler. A total of 13 large, multicentre studies of up to 52 weeks' duration 
have documented its efficacy in more than 15,000 patients with COPD. TIO/OLO 
5/5 µg FDC significantly increases pulmonary function compared with placebo and 
its respective constituent mono-components TIO 5 µg and OLO 5 µg. TIO/OLO 5/5 µg 
also results in statistically and clinically significant improvements in 
patient-reported outcomes, such as dyspnoea, use of rescue medication, and 
health status. Addition of OLO 5 µg to TIO 5 µg reduces the rate of 
moderate-to-severe exacerbations by approximately 10%. Compared with placebo and 
TIO 5 µg, TIO/OLO 5/5 µg significantly improves exercise capacity (e.g. 
endurance time) and physical activity, the latter increase being reached by a 
unique combination behavioural modification intervention, dual bronchodilatation 
and exercise training. Overall, the likelihood for patients to experience a 
clinically significant benefit is higher with TIO/OLO 5/5 µg than with its 
constituent mono-components, which usually yield smaller improvements which do 
not always reach statistical significance, compared with baseline or placebo. 
This supports the early introduction of TIO/OLO 5/5 µg in the management of 
patients with symptomatic COPD.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466619843426
PMCID: PMC6475840
PMID: 31002020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: ED’s clinical 
department has received financial support from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK 
and Novartis to perform clinical studies. He has participated in advisory boards 
for Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, GSK, Novartis and Astra Zeneca, for 
which a fee was given to the clinical department. He has received travel grants 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK and AstraZeneca to attend international 
congresses. He has received speaker’s fees (given to the clinical department) 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Chiesi, Astra Zeneca and Novartis to give 
scientific presentations to local general practitioner groups and 
pulmonologists.


73. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2019 Feb;13(2):125-132. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2019.1561287. Epub 2018 Dec 30.

Mepolizumab for the prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
exacerbations.

Fernandez Romero GA(1), Beros J(1), Criner G(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery , Lewis Katz School of Medicine 
at Temple University , Philadelphia , PA , USA.

Worldwide chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the third most common 
cause of non-communicable deaths. The pathobiology of the disease is 
predominantly neutrophilic but there is a subset of patients with elevated 
peripheral eosinophil count that respond better to inhaled and systemic 
corticosteroids currently being classified as eosinophilic phenotype. This 
review focuses on the role of mepolizumab, a fully humanized monoclonal antibody 
against IL-5 molecule that regulates the eosinophil life cycle, in the 
management of patients with this phenotype of COPD. Areas covered: A 
comprehensive appraisal of the existing literature about the 
pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics as well as the clinical efficacy, safety and 
side effects of mepolizumab in the management of COPD patients with high 
peripheral eosinophil count. Expert commentary: The use of monoclonal antibodies 
against IL-5 to decrease the eosinophil proliferation and subsequent airway 
inflammation is a promising therapeutic target for this phenotype of COPD 
patients. The current phase three trials showed a moderate effect on the 
decrease of annual rate of exacerbations significant in only one study. Further 
research is needed to specifically define the eosinophilic phenotype in the 
patients with COPD and the clinical efficacy of treatments designed as targeted 
therapy in patients with that characteristic profile.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2019.1561287
PMID: 30570418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 24;14(1):e0207675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207675. 
eCollection 2019.

Bacterial regulation of macrophage bacterial recognition receptors in COPD are 
differentially modified by budesonide and fluticasone propionate.

Provost KA(1)(2), Smith M(1), Miller-Larsson A(3), Gudleski GD(4), Sethi 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Veterans Health Administration, Veterans Affairs Western New York Healthcare 
System at Buffalo, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, 
Buffalo, New York, United States of America.
(2)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Jacobs School of 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep 
Medicine, Buffalo, New York, United States of America.
(3)Respiratory GMed, AstraZeneca Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.
(4)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Jacobs School of 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Department of Medicine, Buffalo, New York, 
United States of America.

RATIONALE: Patients with COPD have an increased risk for community-acquired 
pneumonia, which is further increased by inhaled corticosteroids.
OBJECTIVE: To assess effects of the corticosteroids, budesonide and fluticasone 
propionate, on macrophage bacterial responses in COPD.
METHODS: Monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) generated from blood monocytes from 
10 non-smoker controls (NoS), 20 smokers without COPD (Sm), and 40 subjects with 
moderate to severe COPD (21 ex-smokers (COPD-ES) and 19 current smokers 
(COPD-S)) were pre-treated with budesonide or fluticasone (10 nM-1 μM) and 
challenged with live non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHI) or Streptococcus 
pneumoniae (SP). Cell surface bacterial recognition receptor expression (flow 
cytometry) and cytokine release (bead array) were analyzed.
RESULTS: NTHI and SP reduced bacterial recognition receptor expression on MDMs 
from COPD and Sm, but not NoS (except TLR4). SR-AI and MARCO were reduced by 
both NTHI and SP, whereas other receptors by either NTHI or SP. Among COPD 
subjects, COPD-ES demonstrated a greater number of reductions as compared to 
COPD-S. NTHI reduced SR-AI, MARCO, CD11b, CD35 and CD206 in COPD-ES while only 
SR-AI and CD11b in COPD-S. SP reduced SRA-1, CD1d, TLR2 and TLR4 in both COPD-ES 
and COPD-S, and reduced MARCO and CD93 only in COPD-ES. All receptors reduced in 
COPD by NTHI and most by SP, were also reduced in Sm. Budesonide counteracted 
the receptor reductions induced by both NTHI (CD206 p = 0.03, MARCO p = 0.08) 
and SP (SR-AI p = 0.02) in COPD-ES. Fluticasone counteracted only SP-induced 
reductions in TLR2 (p = 0.008 COPD-ES and p = 0.04 COPD-S) and TLR4 (p = 0.02 
COPD-ES). Cytokine release was equivalently reduced by both corticosteroids.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduction in macrophage bacterial recognition receptors during 
bacterial exposure could provide a mechanism for the increased pneumonia risk in 
COPD. Differential effects of budesonide and fluticasone propionate on 
macrophage bacterial recognition receptor expression may contribute to the 
higher pneumonia incidence reported with fluticasone propionate.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207675
PMCID: PMC6345465
PMID: 30677037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Karin Provost received research grant 
funding from: 1. Pulmatrix, LLC that immediately preceded the work 2. Pfizer, 
ASPIRE Awards in Adult Vaccine Research that followed the data collection and 
overlapped with analysis 3. Clinical Advisory Board, ARSANIS, starting 2017. 
Author Sanjay Sethi received research grant funding from: 1. AstraZeneca for a 
separate project on the presence and role of biofilms that overlapped the time 
frame of the research. 2. National Center for Advancing Translational Science 
(National Institutes of Health (NIH), CTSA Award) 3. National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID) (NIH) (co-PI) 4. National Heart, Lung, 
Blood Institute (NHLBI) Subcontract (NIH). Author Anna Miller-Laarson was a 
full-time employee at AstraZeneca AB. Author Miyuki Smith, the lab technician, 
received salary support from the grant funding of AstraZeneca AB, provided by 
the Buffalo Institute of Medical Research. AstraZeneca AB was allowed, by the 
VA-approved research CRADA, to review the data and provide comments, but were 
not allowed to influence the data presented or withhold any parts from 
publication. There are no patents, products in development or marketed products 
associated with this research to declare. This does not alter our adherence to 
PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


75. Respir Res. 2019 Nov 4;20(1):243. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1215-7.

Variable DNA methylation of aging-related genes is associated with male COPD.

Du X(1)(2), Yuan L(1), Wu M(1), Men M(3), He R(2), Wang L(1), Wu S(1), Xiang 
Y(1), Qu X(1), Liu H(1), Qin X(1), Hu C(2), Qin L(4), Liu C(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology; China-Africa Infection Diseases Research Center, 
Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, 410078, Hunan, 
China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for 
Respiratory Diseases, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan, China.
(3)Health Management Center, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for 
Respiratory Diseases, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan, China. qlmelody@csu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Physiology; China-Africa Infection Diseases Research Center, 
Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, 410078, Hunan, 
China. liu.chi@csu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic lung 
inflammatory disease which has a close relationship with aging. Genome-wide 
analysis reveals that DNA methylation markers vary obviously with age. DNA 
methylation variations in peripheral blood have the potential to be biomarkers 
for COPD. However, the specific DNA methylation of aging-related genes in the 
peripheral blood of COPD patients remains largely unknown.
METHODS: Firstly, 9 aging-related differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in COPD 
patients were screened out from the 25 aging-related genes profile through a 
comprehensive screening strategy. Secondly, qPCR and multiple targeted bisulfite 
enrichment sequencing (MethTarget) were used to detect the mRNA level and DNA 
methylation level of the 9 differentially expressed genes in the peripheral 
blood of 60 control subjects and 45 COPD patients. The candidate functional CpG 
sites were selected on the basis of the regulation ability of the target gene 
expression. Thirdly, the correlation was evaluated between the DNA methylation 
level of the key CpG sites and the clinical parameters of COPD patients, 
including forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), forced expiratory 
volume in one second as percentage of predicted volume (FEV1%), forced 
expiratory volume/ forced vital capacity (FEV/FVC), modified British medical 
research council (mMRC) score, acute exacerbation frequency and the situation of 
frequent of acute aggravation (CAT) score. Lastly, differentially methylated CpG 
sites unrelated to smoking were also determined in COPD patients.
RESULTS: Of the 9 differentially expressed aging-related genes, the mRNA 
expression of 8 genes were detected to be significantly down-regulated in COPD 
group, compared with control group. Meanwhile, the methylated level of all 
aging-related genes was changed in COPD group containing 219 COPD-related CpG 
sites in total. Notably, 27 CpG sites of FOXO3 gene showed a lower False 
Discovery Rate (FDR) and higher methylation difference values. Also, some 
variable DNA methylation is associated with the severity of COPD. Additionally, 
of the 219 COPD-related CpG sites, 147 CpG sites were not related to smoking.
CONCLUSION: These results identified that the mRNA expression and DNA 
methylation level of aging-related genes were changed in male COPD patients, 
which provides a molecular link between aging and COPD. The identified CpG 
markers are associated with the severity of COPD and provide new insights into 
the prediction and identification of COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1215-7
PMCID: PMC6829949
PMID: 31684967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


76. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2019 Mar;25(2):165-172. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000554.

Inhaled corticosteroids and fractures in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 
current understanding and recommendations.

Moon JY(1)(2), Sin DD(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, St. Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Hanyang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(3)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) is commonly used in the 
management of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) for 
symptom relief and exacerbation prevention; however, there is a growing concern 
that ICS increases risk of osteoporosis and fractures in patients with COPD.
RECENT FINDINGS: Osteoporosis is a major comorbidity of COPD. There is evidence 
from large observational studies that use of ICS for prolonged period of time 
(e.g. ≥4 years) is associated with accelerated loss of bone mineral density and 
increased risk of fractures in a dose-dependent and time-dependent fashion in 
patients with COPD. The risk of fractures appears increase significantly when 
high doses of ICS (at least 250 μg/day in fluticasone or equivalents) are used 
for a long period of time (at least 3 years).
SUMMARY: ICS increases risk of bone demineralization and fracture in patients 
with COPD. It should be generally avoided in patients with previous fractures or 
significant osteoporosis. If they are used in such patients, close monitoring is 
recommended for accelerated bone demineralization.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000554
PMID: 30507646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Family Med Prim Care. 2019 Feb;8(2):738-740. doi: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_468_18.

Relationship between serum procalcitonin level and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Borsi H(1), Nia EP(2), Mal-Amir MD(3), Raji H(1).

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor of Pulmonology, Air Pollution and Respiratory Diseases 
Research Center, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(2)Medical Doctor of Internal Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical 
Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(3)Fellowship of Pulmonology, Air Pollution and Respiratory Diseases Research 
Center, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Differentiation of the etiologies of acute exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) and differential diagnosis of other 
causes of respiratory attacks in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
patients are challenging. Serum procalcitonin (PCT) which is a biomarker of 
bacterial infection, but not viral infections, could possibly recognize AECOPD 
requiring antibiotic treatment from other etiologies of respiratory attack.
METHODS: Patients aged from 40-80 years who were diagnosed with COPD according 
to the GOLD criteria and who referred to the Imam Khomeini Hospital of Ahvaz in 
2016 were divided into two groups of exacerbated and stable COPD. Exacerbation 
of COPD is defined as worsening of the patient's condition from the stable state 
and behind normal day-to-day variations that is acute in onset and may 
necessitate treatment in a patient with underlying COPD. BODE Index and 6MWDT 
were used to assess the patients, and the severity of their disease was 
determined based on the GOLD criteria. Subsequently, PCT testing using 
electrochemiluminescence (ECL) method was carried out on patients on the same 
day.
RESULTS: PCT level in the exacerbation group was 0.272 ± 0.586 and 0.066 ± 0.027 
in the non-exacerbation group, and their difference was statistically 
significant with P value = 0.001. Based on the results, the cut point of 
differentiating between the AECOPD and the stable groups with a sensitivity of 
68% and a specificity of 80% is 0.085.
CONCLUSION: Overall, the findings of this study indicate that PCT levels could 
be regarded as a good diagnostic marker for patients with COPD, and for the 
differentiation of AECOPD patients from stable COPD patients.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_468_18
PMCID: PMC6436277
PMID: 30984705

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


78. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Nov 22;14:2575-2585. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S219125. eCollection 2019.

Respiratory Mechanics and Diaphragmatic Dysfunction in COPD Patients Who Failed 
Non-Invasive Mechanical Ventilation.

Marchioni A(1), Tonelli R(1)(2), Fantini R(1), Tabbì L(1), Castaniere I(1)(2), 
Livrieri F(1)(3), Bedogni S(4), Ruggieri V(1), Pisani L(5), Nava S(5), Clini 
E(1).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital of Modena, Pneumology Unit and Center for Rare Lung 
Diseases, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Modena and 
Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(2)PhD Course in Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Modena and 
Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(3)Respiratory Disease Unit, Hospital Carlo Poma, Mantova, Italy.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(5)Department of Specialistic, Diagnostic and Experimental Medicine (DIMES), 
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Although non-invasive mechanical ventilation (NIV) is the gold 
standard treatment for patients with acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) 
developing respiratory acidosis, failure rates still range from 5% to 40%. 
Recent studies have shown that the onset of severe diaphragmatic dysfunction 
(DD) during AECOPD increases risk of NIV failure and mortality in this subset of 
patients. Although the imbalance between the load and the contractile capacity 
of inspiratory muscles seems the main cause of AECOPD-induced hypercapnic 
respiratory failure, data regarding the influence of mechanical derangement on 
DD in this acute phase are lacking. With this study, we investigate the impact 
of respiratory mechanics on diaphragm function in AECOPD patients experiencing 
NIV failure.
METHODS: Twelve AECOPD patients with respiratory acidosis admitted to the 
Respiratory ICU of the University Hospital of Modena from 2017 to 2018 
undergoing mechanical ventilation (MV) due to NIV failure were enrolled. Static 
respiratory mechanics and end-expiratory lung volume (EELV) were measured after 
30 mins of volume control mode MV. Subsequently, transdiaphragmatic pressure 
(Pdi) was calculated by means of a sniff maneuver (Pdisniff) after 30 mins of 
spontaneous breathing trial. Linear regression analysis and Pearson's 
correlation coefficient served to assess associations.
RESULTS: Average Pdisniff was 23.3 cmH2O (standard deviation 29 cmH2O) with 3 
patients presenting bilateral diaphragm palsy. Pdisniff was directly correlated 
with static lung elastance (r=0.69, p=0.001) while inverse correlation was found 
with dynamic intrinsic PEEP (r=-0.73, p=0.007). No significant correlation was 
found with static intrinsic PEEP (r=-0.55, p=0.06), EELV (r=-0.4, p=0.3), airway 
resistance (r=-0.2, p=0.54), chest wall, and total elastance (r=-0-01, p=0.96 
and r=0.3, p=0.36, respectively). Significant linear inverse correlation was 
found between Pdisniff and the ratio between Pdi assessed at tidal volume and 
Pdi sniff (r=-0.82, p=0.02).
CONCLUSION: The causes of extreme DD in AECOPD patients who experienced NIV 
failure might be predominantly mechanical, driven by a severe dynamic 
hyperinflation that overlaps on an elastic lung substrate favoring volume 
overload.

© 2019 Marchioni et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S219125
PMCID: PMC6879385
PMID: 31819395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests with any 
organization or entity with a financial interest in competition with the 
subject, matter or materials discussed in the manuscript, and they report no 
conflicts of interest in this work.


79. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Mar 22;14:683-692. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S194367. eCollection 2019.

Exacerbations and health care resource use among patients with COPD in relation 
to blood eosinophil counts.

Müllerová H(1), Hahn B(2), Simard EP(3), Mu G(3), Hatipoğlu U(4).

Author information:
(1)Real-World Evidence, GSK, Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(2)US Medical Affairs, GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA, 
beth.a.hahn@gsk.com.
(3)Real-World Data and Analytics, GSK, Upper Providence, PA, USA.
(4)Center for Comprehensive Care in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, 
Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

PURPOSE: Current understanding of the relationship between COPD phenotype and 
health care resource utilization (HCRU) is limited. This real-world study 
evaluated disease burden and HCRU for COPD subgroups prone to exacerbation as 
defined by blood eosinophil (EOS) count and multiple inhaler triple therapy 
(MITT) use.
METHODS: This was a large-scale, retrospective, longitudinal, observational 
cohort study using data from the US IBM Watson Explorys real-world database (GSK 
Study HO-17-18395). The population of interest comprised patients with COPD ≥40 
years of age with ≥2 moderate or ≥1 severe exacerbations (prior year) while on 
inhaled maintenance therapy, with ≥1 blood EOS count. Data were analyzed during 
the year prior to index date (last COPD encounter between January 1, 2011 and 
December 31, 2016). Four subgroups were analyzed based on a combination of EOS 
counts (<150 and ≥150 cells/μL) and MITT use (receiving or not receiving). Among 
these groups, clinical characteristics, exacerbations, and HCRU were described. 
A sensitivity analysis that further stratified EOS into four categories (<150, 
≥150-<300, ≥300-<500, and ≥500 cells/μL) was also performed.
RESULTS: The COPD population of interest comprised 34,268 patients. Subgroups 
with EOS ≥150 cells/μL vs <150 cells/μL had more comorbidities and experienced 
significantly higher mean numbers of moderate exacerbations (not receiving MITT, 
≥150 cells/μL vs <150 cells/μL: 1.93 vs 1.82, P<0.0001; receiving MITT 2.26 vs 
2.16, P=0.0062) and COPD-related emergency visits (not receiving MITT, ≥150 
cells/μL vs <150 cells/μL: 3.0 vs 2.5, P<0.001; receiving MITT 3.4 vs 3.1, 
P=0.0011). Increasing EOS category was associated with higher HCRU.
CONCLUSION: Blood EOS ≥150/μL cells were associated with increased HCRU and 
higher exacerbation rates compared with EOS <150 cells/μL, irrespective of MITT 
use. COPD phenotyping using blood EOS could help identify candidates for 
additional therapies that target eosinophilic inflammatory pathways.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S194367
PMCID: PMC6435122
PMID: 30962682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure HM, BH, EPS, and GM are all GSK 
employees and own stock in GSK. All authors report no other conflicts of 
interest in this work.


80. Med J Aust. 2019 May;210(9):424-428. doi: 10.5694/mja2.50138. Epub 2019 Apr 11.

Precision health: treating the individual patient with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Obeidat M(1)(2), Sadatsafavi M(1), Sin DD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(2)St Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, Canada.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is defined based on a reduced ratio 
of forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1 ) to forced vital capacity (FVC) 
on spirometry. However, within this definition, there is significant 
heterogeneity of pathophysiological processes that lead to airflow obstruction 
and variation in phenotypic manifestations across patients. Current 
pharmacological treatments are based on large randomised clinical trials that 
apply to an "average" patient. Precision health enables tailoring of treatment 
for each individual patient by taking into account their unique characteristics. 
The number needed to treat (NNT) metric is often used to define implementation 
of precision health for specific interventions, with common endpoints requiring 
an NNT ≤ 5 to achieve precision therapy. Higher NNTs may be acceptable for rare 
but important endpoints such as mortality. Long-acting muscarinic antagonists 
and inhaled corticosteroids, which are commonly used in COPD, have 1-year 
treatment NNTs between 15 and 20 for exacerbation prevention in unselected 
patients with COPD. Subgroup identification using biomarkers or clinical traits 
may enable precision health. For example, NNT for inhaled corticosteroids is 9 
in patients with a blood eosinophil count ≥ 300 cells/μL and 8 for long-acting 
muscarinic antagonists in patients with a body mass index ≤ 20 kg/m2 . Lung 
volume reduction surgery is associated with an NNT of 6 for survival over 5 
years in patients with upper lobe-predominant disease and low exercise capacity 
(whereas the NNT is 245 when no bioimaging or exercise markers are used). 
Continuous domiciliary oxygen therapy (for at least 15 hours/day) has an NNT of 
5 for survival over 5 years in patients with resting hypoxemia (PaO2  < 60 mmHg 
on room air). Emerging areas of precision health in COPD with potential for low 
NNTs in specific circumstances include anti-interleukin-5 therapy for 
eosinophilic COPD, and immunoglobulin replacement therapy for patients with 
severe immunoglobulin deficiency.

© 2019 AMPCo Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.5694/mja2.50138
PMID: 30977152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2019 Jan 14;13:145-150. doi: 10.2147/PPA.S166704. 
eCollection 2019.

Patient-reported outcomes and considerations in the management of COPD: focus on 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium bromide.

Ridolo E(1), Pellicelli I(1), Gritti B(2), Incorvaia C(2).

Author information:
(1)Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Medicine and Surgery Department, University 
of Parma, Parma, Italy, erminia.ridolo@unipr.it.
(2)Cardiac/Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, ASST Pini-CTO, Milan, Italy.

Dual bronchodilation with long-acting beta-2 agonists and muscarinic antagonists 
is recommended in patients with severe to very severe COPD. Among dual 
bronchodilator combinations, indacaterol/glycopyrronium combination (IGC) 
received evidence of higher efficacy and good safety compared with monotherapy 
with either drug as well as with tiotropium. In randomized controlled trials, 
the primary outcome is usually the change in mean FEV1 resulting from treatment. 
However, the functional aspects that influence the physician's choice of the 
type of management may not be considered important by the patient, based on his 
perception of the disease. To address such issue, patient-reported outcomes 
(PROs) were assessed in recent studies. They include patient's perception of 
breathlessness, physical functioning, global health status, quality of life, use 
of rescue medications, and patient's report of COPD exacerbations. PRO data from 
the studies showed a clear improvement in patients' awareness of a better 
control of the disease in patients treated with IGC. In addition, the latest 
literature on two important issues influencing patient's preference and 
adherence, ie, the once-daily administration and the device to be used, 
confirmed the effectiveness of IGC and the ability of its device (Breezhaler®) 
to result in patient's satisfaction, ease of use, less handling errors, and 
self-assurance to have inhaled the entire dose.

DOI: 10.2147/PPA.S166704
PMCID: PMC6338236
PMID: 30679906

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work. Dr Cristoforo Incorvaia reports personal fees from 
Staller-genes Greer, outside the submitted work.


82. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Oct 17;14:2365-2373. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S209513. eCollection 2019.

Nebulized Colistin And Continuous Cyclic Azithromycin In Severe COPD Patients 
With Chronic Bronchial Infection Due To Pseudomonas aeruginosa: A Retrospective 
Cohort Study.

Montón C(1)(2), Prina E(1), Pomares X(1)(3), Cugat JR(4), Casabella A(5), Oliva 
JC(6), Gallego M(1)(3), Monsó E(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital De Sabadell, Institut 
Universitari Parc Taulí-UAB, Sabadell, Spain.
(2)Health Services Research on Chronic Diseases Network-REDISSEC, Galdakao, 
Spain.
(3)CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, CIBERES, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fundació Althaia, Manresa, Spain.
(5)Laboratory of Microbiology-UDIAT, Institut Universitari Parc Taulí-UAB, 
Sabadell, Spain.
(6)Epidemiology and Assessment Unit, Fundació Parc Taulí, Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona, Sabadell, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Long-term use of nebulized or oral antibiotics is common in the 
treatment of cystic fibrosis and non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. To date, 
however, few studies have focused on the use of nebulized antibiotics in COPD 
patients. The aims of this study are: to establish whether a combination of 
nebulized colistin plus continuous cyclic azithromycin in severe COPD patients 
with chronic bronchial infection due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa reduces the 
frequency of exacerbations, and to assess the effect of this treatment on 
microbiological sputum isolates.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A retrospective cohort was created for the analysis of 
patients with severe COPD and chronic bronchial infection due to P. aeruginosa 
treated with nebulized colistin at the Respiratory Day Care Unit between 2005 
and 2015. The number and characteristics of COPD exacerbations (ECOPD) before 
and up to two years after the introduction of nebulized colistin treatment were 
recorded.
RESULTS: We analyzed 32 severe COPD patients who received nebulized colistin for 
at least three months (median 17 months [IQR 7-24]). All patients but one 
received combination therapy with continuous cyclic azithromycin (median 24 
months [IQR 11-30]). A significant reduction in the number of ECOPD from 
baseline of 38.3% at two years of follow-up was observed, with a clear decrease 
in P. aeruginosa ECOPD (from 59.5% to 24.6%) and a P. aeruginosa eradication 
rate of 28% over the two-year follow-up.
CONCLUSION: In patients with severe COPD and chronic bronchial infection due to 
P. aeruginosa, combination therapy with nebulized colistin and continuous cyclic 
azithromycin significantly reduced the number of ECOPD, with a marked decrease 
in P. aeruginosa sputum isolates.

© 2019 Montón et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S209513
PMCID: PMC6802559
PMID: 31802860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have any conflict of 
interests to declare regarding this manuscript.


83. Respir Med. 2019 Feb;147:37-43. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.12.014. Epub 2019 Jan 
9.

Impact of smoking status and concomitant medications on the effect of high-dose 
N-acetylcysteine on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations: A 
post-hoc analysis of the PANTHEON study.

Papi A(1), Zheng J(2), Criner GJ(3), Fabbri LM(4), Calverley PMA(5).

Author information:
(1)Section of Cardiorespiratory and Internal Medicine, Department of Medical 
Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. Electronic address: 
ppa@unife.it.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research 
Center of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, First 
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510120, China.
(3)Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Section of Cardiorespiratory and Internal Medicine, Department of Medical 
Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy; COPD Center, Institute of 
Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(5)School of Aging and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

BACKGROUND: N-acetylcysteine (NAC) 600 mg twice daily is a well-tolerated oral 
antioxidant mucolytic that reduces the risk of moderate to severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. PANTHEON was one of the 
largest studies to evaluate NAC in COPD. It recruited current, ex- and 
never-smokers, concomitantly treated with other medications, and used a 
symptom-based definition of COPD exacerbations rather than the conventional 
healthcare resource utilisation (HCU) criteria.
METHODS: This manuscript reports post-hoc analyses of the PANTHEON dataset 
investigating whether smoking status or use of concomitant medications 
influenced the efficacy of NAC in terms of reducing exacerbations, defined 
according to HCU.
RESULTS: Compared with placebo (N = 482), NAC (N = 482) reduced the rate of HCU 
events by 20% (p = 0.0027), with a larger effect in current/ex-smokers (23%; 
p < 0.01). In patients receiving NAC and long-acting inhaled bronchodilator(s) 
but no ICS, there was a 60% reduction in the rate of exacerbations compared to 
those receiving placebo, long-acting bronchodilator(s) and ICS (p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these post-hoc hypothesis-generating analyses confirm that 
NAC reduces the rate of COPD exacerbations, particularly in patients with COPD 
who have a significant smoking history, and in those not treated with ICS. NAC 
may provide an alternative to ICS-containing combinations in these patient 
subgroups.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Chinese Clinical Trials Registry, 
ChiCTR-TRC-09000460.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.12.014
PMID: 30704697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. BMC Pulm Med. 2019 Jan 25;19(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s12890-018-0771-9.

A prospective study of salvational intervention with ICS/LABA for reducing 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation under severe air pollution 
(SIRCAP) in Beijing: protocol of a multi-center randomized controlled trial.

Zhou T(1), Zhong Y(1), Liao J(1), Wang G(2), Li X(3), Qian X(4), Xiang P(5), 
Chen X(6), Xu Z(7), Zhang F(8), Wang X(8), Wang S(9), Li X(10), Yu C(11), Zhang 
Y(12), Xia G(13), Dai L(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Peking University First 
Hospital, No.8 Xishiku Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, 100034, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Peking University First 
Hospital, No.8 Xishiku Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, 100034, China. 
wangguangfa@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Medical Statistics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Civil Aviation General Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(5)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Peking University 
Shougang hospital, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Hospital of Shunyi District Beijing, 
Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Luhe Hospital 
capital medical university, Beijing, China.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Aerospace 731 Hospital, Beijing, China.
(9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Beijing Miyun Hospital, Beijing, China.
(10)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Beijing Changping Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(11)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Beijing Jingmei Group General Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(12)Department of Respiratory Medicine, People's Hospital of Beijing Daxing 
District, Beijing, China.
(13)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Jishuitan 
Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a major cause of 
morbidity and mortality all over the world. Acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) 
not only accelerates the progression of disease, but also causes hospital 
administration and death events. Epidemiologic studies have shown air pollution 
is a high risk factor of AECOPD. However, there are rare technics or treatment 
strategies recommended to reduce severe air pollution related AECOPD.
METHODS: This is a multi-center, prospective, randomized and standard treatment 
parallel control clinical trial. Seven hundred sixty-four stable COPD patients 
in group B, C and D according to GOLD 2017 will be recruited and equally divided 
into two parallel groups, salvational intervention (SI group) and control group 
(CT group). Original treatments for participants include tiotropium (18μg once 
q.d), budesonide/formoterol (160μg/4.5μg once or twice b.i.d) or 
budesonide/formoterol (160μg/4.5μg once or twice b.i.d) with tiotropium (18μg 
once q.d). The savational intervention for SI group is routine treatment plus 
budesonide/formoterol (160μg/4.5μg once b.i.d) from the first day after severe 
air pollution (air quality index, AQI ≥200) to the third day after AQI < 200. CT 
group will maintain the original treatment. The intervention will last for 
2 years. Primary outcome is the frequency of AECOPD per year and the secondary 
outcomes include the incidence of unplanned outpatient visits, emergency visits, 
hospitalization, medical cost and mortality associated with AECOPD per year.
DISCUSSION: The salvational intervention is a novel strategy for COPD management 
under severe air pollution. Results of the present study will provide reference 
information to guide clinical practice in reducing the air pollution related 
exacerbation of COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study has been registered at www.ClinicalTrials.gov 
(registration identifier: NCT03083067 ) in 17 March, 2017.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-018-0771-9
PMCID: PMC6347780
PMID: 30683080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
first version study protocol has been approved by the Peking University First 
Hospital Institutional Review Board (IRB) (2016[1032]) on March 10th, 2016. Any 
protocol modifications will be submitted for the IRB review and approval. The 
study will be conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP) 
requirements and ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The 
purposes, procedures, as well as potential benefits and risks of the study will 
be explained carefully by investigators with a written informed consent. Written 
informed consent will be obtained from each participant or from the surrogate of 
the participant who cannot provide informed consent. Personal information and 
related documents of all participants will be kept strictly. Every participant 
will be identified by a subject number and a name acronym in the Case Report 
Form. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.


85. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 6;14:2849-2861. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S226601. eCollection 2019.

The IMPACT Study - Single Inhaler Triple Therapy (FF/UMEC/VI) Versus FF/VI And 
UMEC/VI In Patients With COPD: Efficacy And Safety In A Japanese Population.

Kato M(1), Tomii K(2), Hashimoto K(3), Nezu Y(3), Ishii T(4), Jones CE(5), 
Kilbride S(6), Gross AS(7), Clifton CS(7), Lipson DA(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Chest Disease Clinical and Research Institute, Kishiwada City Hospital, 
Kishiwada, Japan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kobe City Medical Center General 
Hospital, Kobe, Japan.
(3)Evidence Generation Department, GlaxoSmithKline K.K., Tokyo, Japan.
(4)MA Respiratory Department, GlaxoSmithKline K.K., Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Development, R&D, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(6)Biostatistics, GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(7)Clinical Pharmacology Modelling & Simulation, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Sydney, 
Australia.
(8)Clinical Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA, USA.
(9)Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Division, Department of Medicine, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

PURPOSE: The Informing the Pathway of COPD Treatment (IMPACT) study demonstrated 
that single-inhaler triple therapy fluticasone furoate/umeclidinium/vilanterol 
(FF/UMEC/VI) reduces moderate/severe exacerbation rates and improves lung 
function and health status versus FF/VI or UMEC/VI dual therapy in patients with 
symptomatic COPD and a history of exacerbations. This analysis evaluated the 
efficacy and safety of FF/UMEC/VI in patients enrolled in Japan.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: IMPACT was a 52-week, randomized, double-blind, 
multicenter study comparing FF/UMEC/VI 100/62.5/25 µg with FF/VI 100/25 µg or 
UMEC/VI 62.5/25 µg in patients ≥40 years with symptomatic COPD and ≥1 
moderate/severe exacerbation in the previous year. Endpoints included annual 
rate of on-treatment moderate/severe exacerbations (primary endpoint), 
time-to-first on-treatment moderate/severe exacerbation and change from baseline 
at Week 52 in trough FEV1, post-bronchodilator FEV1, St. George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire, and COPD Assessment Test score. Safety was also assessed.
RESULTS: The Japan subgroup accounted for only 4% (378/10,355) of the overall 
IMPACT intent-to-treat (ITT) population. In the Japan subgroup, FF/UMEC/VI 
reduced the annual rate of on-treatment moderate/severe exacerbations by 15% 
(95% CI: -20, 40) versus FF/VI (compared with 15% [10, 20] in the ITT) and 36% 
(95% CI: 6, 57) versus UMEC/VI (compared with 25% [19, 30] in the ITT). 
FF/UMEC/VI reduced moderate/severe exacerbation risk (time-to-first), improved 
lung function and health status at Week 52 versus both dual therapies. These 
results were in the same direction and of a generally similar magnitude to those 
seen in the overall ITT population. No new safety signals were identified in the 
Japan subgroup compared with the ITT population. Pneumonia incidence was higher 
with FF/UMEC/VI and FF/VI versus UMEC/VI.
CONCLUSION: These results highlight the favorable benefit-risk profile of 
FF/UMEC/VI single-inhaler triple therapy compared with FF/VI or UMEC/VI dual 
therapy in patients in Japan with symptomatic COPD and ≥1 exacerbation in the 
prior year.

© 2019 Kato et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S226601
PMCID: PMC6904247
PMID: 31839705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Motokazu Kato has received lecture honoraria 
from GSK, AstraZeneca, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novartis Pharma. Keisuke 
Tomii has received lecture honoraria from Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, 
AstraZeneca, GSK, Novartis Pharma, and Teijin Pharma. Kenichi Hashimoto, Takeo 
Ishii, C. Elaine Jones, Sally Kilbride, Annette S. Gross, Christine S. Clifton, 
and David A. Lipson are GSK employees and hold stock/shares in GSK. Yasuko Nezu 
is an employee of GSK. Ellipta is owned by or licensed to the GSK Group of 
Companies. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


86. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Aug 20;14:1839-1854. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S214061. eCollection 2019.

Dual versus triple therapy in patients hospitalized for COPD in France: a claims 
data study.

Dalon F(1), Roche N(2), Belhassen M(1), Nolin M(1), Pegliasco H(3), Deslée G(4), 
Housset B(5), Devillier P(6), Van Ganse E(1)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacoepidemiology Department, PELyon, Lyon, France.
(2)Respiratory Medicine, Cochin Hospital, AP-HP and Paris Descartes University 
(EA2511), Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(3)Pulmonary Department, European Hospital, Marseille, France.
(4)Pulmonary Department, INSERM U1250, Maison Blanche University Hospital, 
Reims, France.
(5)Pulmonary Department, CHI de Créteil, University Paris Est Créteil, Créteil, 
France.
(6)Department of Airway Diseases, UPRES EA 220, Foch Hospital, Paris-Saclay 
University, Suresnes, France.
(7)EA 7425 Hesper Health Services and Performance Research, Claude-Bernard 
University, Lyon, France.
(8)Respiratory Medicine, Croix-rousse Hospital, Lyon, France.

PURPOSES: Following a hospitalization for COPD, dual and triple therapies were 
compared in terms of persistence and relations with outcomes (exacerbations, 
health care resource use and costs).
METHODS: This was a historical observational database study. All patients aged 
≥45 hospitalized for COPD between 2007 and 2015 were identified in a 1/97th 
random sample of French claims data. Patients receiving dual therapy within 60 
days after hospitalization were compared to patients receiving triple therapy, 
after propensity score matching on disease severity.
RESULTS: Of the 3,089 patients hospitalized for COPD, 1,538 (49.8%) received 
either dual or triple therapy in the 2 months following inclusion, and 1,500 
(48.6%) had at least 30 days of follow-up available; 846 (27.4%) received dual 
therapy, and 654 (21.2%) received triple therapy. After matching, the number of 
exacerbations was 2.4 per year in the dual vs 2.3 in the triple group (p=0.45). 
Among newly treated patients (n=206), persistence at 12 months was similar in 
the dual and triple groups (48% vs 41%, respectively, p=0.37). As compared to 
patients on dual therapy, more patients on triple therapy received oral 
corticosteroids (49.1 vs 40.4%, p=0.003) or were hospitalized for any reason 
(67% vs 55.8%, p=0.0001) or for COPD (35.3 vs 25.1%, p=0.0002) during follow-up. 
Cost of care was higher for patients on triple than for those on dual therapy 
(€11,877.1 vs €9,825.1, p=0.01).
CONCLUSION: Following hospitalizations for COPD, patients on dual and triple 
therapy experienced recurrent exacerbations, limited adherence to therapies and 
high cost of care. Patients on triple therapy appeared more severe than those on 
dual therapy, as reflected by exacerbations and health care resource use.

© 2019 Dalon et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S214061
PMCID: PMC6708389
PMID: 31692478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EVG is Scientific Advisor of PELyon, he reports 
personal fees from PELyon, during the conduct of the study; personal fees from 
PELyon, outside the submitted work. MN, FD and MB (employees of PELyon) 
conducted the study through sponsorship by Chiesi SAS, and were not paid for 
manuscript development. NR reports grants and personal fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Novartis, Pfizer and personal fees from Teva, GSK, AstraZeneca, 
Mundipharma, Cipla, Sanofi, Sandoz, 3M, Zambon and Chiesi. PD has received 
consulting fees, honoraria for lectures and/or research funding from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis during 
the last 3 years. He reports personal fees from Chiesi, during the conduct of 
the study; personal fees from Astra Zeneca, personal fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, personal fees from Chiesi, personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, 
personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Sanofi, outside the submitted 
work. BH received honorarium from Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer, Novartis, Teva, 
GSK, AstraZeneca and Chiesi for his participation in scientific committees or 
conferences. He reports personal fees from Chiesi, during the conduct of the 
study; personal fees from GSK, personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal 
fees from Novartis, outside the submitted work. HP received honorarium from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Teva, GSK, AstraZeneca and Chiesi for his 
participation in scientific committees or conferences, is on the board for 
Chiesi and Novartis, and received an invitation to 2019 American Thoracic 
Society International Conference in Arizona, USA.  GD received research funding 
from BTG/PneumRx and received honorarium from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, 
Chiesi, Novartis, BTG/PneumRx for his participation in scientific committees or 
conferences. He reports personal fees from Chiesi, during the conduct of the 
study; personal fees from AstraZeneca, personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
personal fees from BTG/PneumRx, and personal fees from Nuvaira, outside the 
submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


87. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Jun 15;199(12):1496-1507. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201806-1095OC.

Human Rhinovirus Impairs the Innate Immune Response to Bacteria in Alveolar 
Macrophages in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Finney LJ(1), Belchamber KBR(1), Fenwick PS(1), Kemp SV(1)(2), Edwards MR(1), 
Mallia P(1), Donaldson G(1), Johnston SL(1), Donnelly LE(1), Wedzicha JA(1).

Author information:
(1)1 COPD and Asthma Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial 
College London, London, United Kingdom; and.
(2)2 Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Jun 15;199(12):1451-1452.

Rationale: Human rhinovirus (HRV) is a common cause of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. Secondary bacterial infection is 
associated with more severe symptoms and delayed recovery. Alveolar macrophages 
clear bacteria from the lung and maintain lung homeostasis through cytokine 
secretion. These processes are defective in COPD. The effect of HRV on 
macrophage function is unknown. Objectives: To investigate the effect of HRV on 
phagocytosis and cytokine response to bacteria by alveolar macrophages and 
monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) in COPD and healthy control subjects. 
Methods: Alveolar macrophages were obtained by bronchoscopy and MDM by 
adherence. Macrophages were exposed to HRV16 (multiplicity of infection 5), 
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly I:C) 30 μg/ml, IFN-β 10 μg/ml, IFN-γ 10 
μg/ml, or medium control for 24 hours. Phagocytosis of fluorescently labeled 
Haemophilus influenzae or Streptococcus pneumoniae was assessed by fluorimetry. 
CXCL8 (IL-8), IL-6, TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor-α), and IL-10 release was 
measured by ELISA. Measurements and Main Results: HRV significantly impaired 
phagocytosis of H. influenzae by 23% in MDM (n = 37; P = 0.004) and 18% in 
alveolar macrophages (n = 20; P < 0.0001) in COPD. HRV also significantly 
reduced phagocytosis of S. pneumoniae by 33% in COPD MDM (n = 20; P = 0.0192). 
There was no effect in healthy control subjects. Phagocytosis of H. influenzae 
was also impaired by poly I:C but not IFN-β or IFN-γ in COPD MDM. HRV 
significantly reduced cytokine responses to H. influenzae. The IL-10 response to 
H. influenzae was significantly impaired by poly I:C, IFN-β, and IFN-γ in COPD 
cells. Conclusions: HRV impairs phagocytosis of bacteria in COPD, which may lead 
to an outgrowth of bacteria. HRV also impairs cytokine responses to bacteria via 
the TLR3/IFN pathway, which may prevent resolution of inflammation leading to 
prolonged exacerbations in COPD.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201806-1095OC
PMID: 30562053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Jan 1;199(1):43-51. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201801-0038OC.

Capturing Exacerbations of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease with EXACT. A 
Subanalysis of FLAME.

Frent SM(1)(2), Chapman KR(3), Larbig M(4), Mackay A(2)(5), Fogel R(6), 
Gutzwiller FS(4), Shen S(6), Patalano F(4), Banerji D(6), Kostikas K(4), 
Wedzicha JA(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Pulmonology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, 
Timisoara, Romania.
(2)2 European Respiratory Society Fellow at Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)3 Department of Medicine, Asthma and Airway Centre, University Health 
Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)4 Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)5 National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(6)6 Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, New Jersey; and.
(7)7 Editor-In-Chief, AJRCCM.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Jan 1;199(1):2-4.

RATIONALE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations accelerate lung 
function decline, reduce quality of life, and increase mortality. A subset of 
patients (n = 457) from the FLAME (Effect of Indacaterol Glycopyrronium vs. 
Fluticasone Salmeterol on COPD Exacerbations) study used the Exacerbations of 
COPD Tool (EXACT) to capture symptom-defined exacerbations.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effect of indacaterol/glycopyrronium versus 
salmeterol/fluticasone on symptom-defined exacerbations measured using EXACT, 
and to assess differences between these events and exacerbations requiring 
healthcare resource use (HCRU).
METHODS: All patients in FLAME used an electronic diary to record and detect 
symptom deteriorations; HCRU-related exacerbations were confirmed by 
investigators. In patients using the EXACT questionnaire, the onset, recovery, 
and magnitude of symptom-defined exacerbations were identified by changes in 
total scores relative to baseline. We analyzed the annualized rate and time to 
first symptom-defined (EXACT) exacerbation and assessed differences between 
symptom-defined and HCRU events in terms of number, severity, and concordance.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: A nonsignificant 17% reduction in the annualized 
rate of symptom-defined (EXACT) exacerbations (rate ratio, 0.83; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.60-1.14; P = 0.242) and a numerically longer time to first 
symptom-defined exacerbation were observed with indacaterol/glycopyrronium 
versus salmeterol/fluticasone (hazard ratio, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.56-1.03; 
P = 0.075). These results were consistent with data from the overall FLAME 
population. Of the symptom-defined (EXACT) events, 23.5% corresponded to HCRU 
events, and 22.2% of HRCU events were captured by EXACT (κ index, 0.24; 95% CI, 
0.15-0.33).
CONCLUSIONS: Regardless of the exacerbation definition used, our findings 
support the use of long-acting β2 agonists/long-acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonists as the preferred treatment option for patients at risk of future 
exacerbations. Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov 
(NCT01782326).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201801-0038OC
PMCID: PMC6353015
PMID: 30019939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Pulm Ther. 2019 Jun;5(1):23-41. doi: 10.1007/s41030-019-0090-1. Epub 2019 Mar 
13.

Inhaler Devices for Delivery of LABA/LAMA Fixed-Dose Combinations in Patients 
with COPD.

D'Urzo A(1), Chapman KR(2), Donohue JF(3), Kardos P(4), Maleki-Yazdi MR(5), 
Price D(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada. tonydurzo@sympatico.ca.
(2)Asthma and Airway Centre, University Health Network, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Group Practice and Centre for Allergy, Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Red 
Cross Maingau Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany.
(5)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Women's College Hospital, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Centre of Academic Primary Care, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(7)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute, Singapore, Singapore.

Inhaled fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of a long-acting β-agonist (LABA) and a 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) have become the cornerstone for the 
maintenance treatment of symptomatic COPD patients. In this regard, global COPD 
treatment guidelines have recognized the importance of inhaler devices as 
integral contributors to the effectiveness of LABA/LAMA FDCs and recommend 
regular assessment of inhaler device use by the patients in order to improve 
long-term clinical outcomes. Optimal disease control is also highly dependent 
upon patient preferences and adherence to inhaler devices. This review 
objectively examines and compares the major inhaler devices used to deliver 
different LABA/LAMA FDCs, discusses the inhaler device characteristics that 
determine drug deposition in the airways, real-life preference for inhaler 
devices, and handling of inhaler devices that impact the results of the 
long-term management of COPD. The introduction of new LABA/LAMA FDCs, new 
inhaler devices, and more clinical studies have created confusion among 
physicians in choosing the optimal inhaled therapy for COPD patients; in this 
context, this review attempts to provide an evidence-based framework for 
informed decision-making with a particular focus on the inhaler devices.Funding. 
The preparation of this manuscript was funded by Novartis Pharma AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s41030-019-0090-1
PMCID: PMC6967354
PMID: 32026426


90. Adv Clin Exp Med. 2019 Jun;28(6):783-788. doi: 10.17219/acem/94153.

Serum testosterone depression as a factor influencing the general condition in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients.

Rubinsztajn R(1), Przybyłowski T(1), Maskey-Warzęchowska M(1), Karwat K(1), 
Chazan R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Pulmonary Diseases and Allergy, Medical 
University of Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Testosterone has been recognized for its anabolic properties. It has 
been documented that in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), chronic hypoxia, disease severity, smoking, and corticosteroid treatment 
may contribute to low testosterone levels.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to evaluate the incidence of decreased 
serum testosterone concentration in male COPD patients and its influence on 
their condition.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study group consisted of 90 male patients, aged 67.2 
±8.8 years in all stages of airflow limitation severity (mild n = 6, moderate n 
= 43, severe n = 28 and very severe n = 13) Serum testosterone concentration was 
evaluated using ELISA method (Testosterone ELISE LDN). Decreased serum 
testosterone level was defined as a value of less than 3 ng/mL. Testosterone 
levels were related clinical features of COPD.
RESULTS: Serum testosterone concentration did not differ in patients with 
different stages of airflow limitation severity (3.8 ±0.7 ng/mL for mild: 3.6 
±2.1 ng/mL for moderate; 3.4 ±1.2 ng/mL for severe and 3.7 ±1.7 ng/mL for very 
severe, respectively). Decreased serum testosterone was found in 30 patients 
(group A). There were no differences in age, the number of exacerbations or CRP 
concentration between patients with decreased and the normal serum testosterone 
group (group B). Group A was characterized by a lower FEV1, shorter 6-minute 
walking distance, longer smoking history and higher BMI, but no differences in 
body composition and densitometry results were found.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum testosterone depression may occur in as much as 30% of male 
COPD patients in all COPD stages of severity. The relationship between serum 
testosterone and negative COPD prognostic factors indicates its influence on the 
natural history of the disease.

DOI: 10.17219/acem/94153
PMID: 30843676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. BMJ Open. 2019 Nov 4;9(11):e034592. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-034592.

Endotype-driven prediction of acute exacerbations in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (EndAECOPD): protocol for a prospective cohort study.

Xiao W(1), Du LY(1), Mao B(1), Miao TW(1), Fu JJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Sichuan 
University West China Hospital, Chengdu, China.
(2)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Sichuan 
University West China Hospital, Chengdu, China fu.juanjuan@scu.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Current strategies for the prevention of acute exacerbations in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are primarily based on clinical 
measurements but fail to target the pathophysiological mechanisms, namely 
endotypes, of the disease. Studies identifying endotypes underlying exacerbation 
susceptibility and discovering specific biomarkers may lead to the development 
of targeted therapeutics but are lacking. This study aims to assess a broad 
spectrum of biomarkers at multiple biological levels (genetics, airway 
inflammation and respiratory microbiome) for their ability in predicting acute 
exacerbations of COPD, thus enables high-resolution disease endotyping and may 
lead to precision treatment of the disease.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: In this prospective cohort study, participants with stable 
COPD (n=600) will be recruited and assessed for demographics, symptom scores, 
spirometry, medication use and comorbidities at baseline. Blood will be obtained 
for genotyping variants in a panel of nine genes. Induced sputum will be 
collected for the profile of microbiota using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, 
quantification of bacterial load, inflammatory mediators assay and sputum 
cytometry. Participants will be followed up for their exacerbations till 12 
months and reassessed for the clinical measurements as baseline. The primary 
outcomes are total number of exacerbations, severe exacerbations, moderate 
exacerbations and time to first exacerbation. The secondary outcomes are changes 
in lung function and symptom scores. The effect of biomarkers representing 
genetic variants, airway inflammation and respiratory microbiome on predicting 
the frequent exacerbator phenotype and exacerbation frequency will be analysed 
with multivariable modelling, and time to first exacerbation with a Cox 
regression model.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study has been approved by the Clinical Trial and 
Biomedical Ethics Committee of West China Hospital of Sichuan University (No. 
2018-298). The results of the study will be published on peer-reviewed journals.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ChiCTR1800019063.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-034592
PMCID: PMC6858242
PMID: 31690612

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


92. Chest. 2019 Mar;155(3):519-527. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.11.028. Epub 2018 Dec 
26.

Aspirin Use and Respiratory Morbidity in COPD: A Propensity Score-Matched 
Analysis in Subpopulations and Intermediate Outcome Measures in COPD Study.

Fawzy A(1), Putcha N(1), Aaron CP(2), Bowler RP(3), Comellas AP(4), Cooper 
CB(5), Dransfield MT(6), Han MK(7), Hoffman EA(8), Kanner RE(9), Krishnan 
JA(10), Labaki WW(7), Paine R 3rd(9), Paulin LM(11), Peters SP(12), Wise R(1), 
Barr RG(2), Hansel NN(13); SPIROMICS Investigators.

Collaborators: Alexis NE, Anderson WH, Barjaktarevic I, Barr RG, Bleecker ER, 
Boucher RC, Bowler RP, Carretta EE, Christenson SA, Comellas AP, Cooper CB, 
Couper DJ, Criner GJ, Crystal RG, Curtis JL, Doerschuk CM, Dransfield MT, 
Freeman CM, Han MK, Hansel NN, Hastie AT, Hoffman EA, Kaner RJ, Kanner RE, 
Kleerup EC, Krishnan JA, LaVange LM, Lazarus SC, Martinez FJ, Meyers DA, Moore 
WC, Newell JD Jr, Paulin L, Peters S, Pirozzi C, Oelsner EC, O'Neal WK, Ortega 
VE, Paine R 3rd, Putcha N, Raman S, Rennard SI, Tashkin DP, Wells JM, Wise RA, 
Woodruff PG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
(2)Department of Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY.
(3)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, 
CO.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Occupational Medicine, University 
of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA.
(5)Department of Medicine and Department of Physiology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
(6)Lung Health Center and Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care 
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.
(8)Department of Radiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA.
(9)Division of Respiratory, Critical Care and Occupational Medicine, University 
of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, UT.
(10)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep, and Allergy, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(11)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center /Geisel School of 
Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH.
(12)Section on Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Immunologic Diseases, Wake 
Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC.
(13)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Electronic address: nhansel1@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: Aspirin use in COPD has been associated with reduced all-cause 
mortality in meta-regression analysis with few equivocal studies. However, the 
effect of aspirin on COPD morbidity is unknown.
METHODS: Self-reported daily aspirin use was obtained at baseline from SPIROMICS 
participants with COPD (FEV1/FVC < 70%). Acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD) 
were prospectively ascertained through quarterly structured telephone 
questionnaires up to 3 years and categorized as moderate (symptoms treated with 
antibiotics or oral corticosteroids) or severe (requiring ED visit or 
hospitalization). Aspirin users were matched one-to-one with nonusers, based on 
propensity score. The association of aspirin use with total, moderate, and 
severe AECOPD was investigated using zero-inflated negative binomial models. 
Linear or logistic regression was used to investigate the association with 
baseline respiratory symptoms, quality of life, and exercise tolerance.
RESULTS: Among 1,698 participants, 45% reported daily aspirin use at baseline. 
Propensity score matching resulted in 503 participant pairs. Aspirin users had a 
lower incidence rate of total AECOPD (adjusted incidence rate ratio [IRR], 0.78; 
95% CI, 0.65-0.94), with similar effect for moderate but not severe AECOPD (IRR, 
0.86; 95% CI, 0.63-1.18). Aspirin use was associated with lower total St. 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire score (β, -2.2; 95% CI, -4.1 to -0.4), 
reduced odds of moderate-severe dyspnea (modified Medical Research Council 
questionnaire score ≥ 2; adjusted odds ratio, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.51-0.93), and COPD 
Assessment Test score (β, -1.1; 95% CI, -1.9 to -0.2) but not 6-min walk 
distance (β, 0.7 m; 95% CI, -14.3 to 15.6).
CONCLUSIONS: Daily aspirin use is associated with reduced rate of COPD 
exacerbations, less dyspnea, and better quality of life. Randomized clinical 
trials of aspirin use in COPD are warranted to account for unmeasured and 
residual confounding.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: NCT01969344; URL: 
www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Copyright © 2018 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.11.028
PMCID: PMC6414789
PMID: 30593776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Chron Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;16:1479973118815694. doi: 
10.1177/1479973118815694.

Clinical outcomes of theophylline use as add-on therapy in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: A propensity score matching analysis.

Wilairat P(1)(2), Kengkla K(1)(2), Thayawiwat C(1), Phlaisaithong P(1), 
Somboonmee S(1), Saokaew S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)1 School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Phayao, Phayao, Thailand.
(2)2 Center of Health Outcomes Research and Therapeutic Safety (Cohorts), School 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Phayao, Phayao, Thailand.
(3)3 School of Pharmacy, Monash University Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.

To examine clinical outcomes of theophylline use in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) receiving inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and 
long-acting beta-2 agonists (LABA). Electronic data from five hospitals located 
in Northern Thailand between January 2011 and December 2015 were retrospectively 
collected. Propensity score (PS) matching (2:1 ratio) technique was used to 
minimize confounding factors. The primary outcome was overall exacerbations. 
Secondary outcomes were exacerbation not leading to hospital admission, 
hospitalization for exacerbation, hospitalization for pneumonia, and all-cause 
hospitalizations. Cox's proportional hazards models were used to estimate 
adjusted hazard ratio (aHR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). After PS matching, 
of 711 patients with COPD (mean age: 70.1 years; 74.4% male; 60.8% severe 
airflow obstruction), 474 theophylline users and 237 non-theophylline users were 
included. Mean follow-up time was 2.26 years. Theophylline significantly 
increased the risk of overall exacerbation (aHR: 1.48, 95% CI: 1.11-1.96; p = 
0.008) and exacerbation not leading to hospital admission (aHR: 1.47, 95% CI: 
1.06-2.03; p = 0.020). Theophylline use did not significantly increase the risk 
of hospitalization for exacerbation (aHR: 1.11, 95% CI: 0.79-1.58; p = 0.548), 
hospitalization for pneumonia (aHR: 1.28, 95% CI: 0.89-1.84; p = 0.185), and 
all-cause hospitalizations (aHR: 1.03, 95% CI: 0.80-1.33; p = 0.795). 
Theophylline use as add-on therapy to ICS and LABA might be associated with an 
increased risk for overall exacerbation in patients with COPD. A large-scale 
prospective study of theophylline use investigating both safety and efficacy is 
warranted.

DOI: 10.1177/1479973118815694
PMCID: PMC6302972
PMID: 30558448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


94. Respir Res. 2019 Jan 8;20(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-0972-7.

Treatment response to indacaterol/glycopyrronium versus salmeterol/fluticasone 
in exacerbating COPD patients by gender: a post-hoc analysis in the FLAME study.

Wedzicha JA(1), Singh D(2), Tsiligianni I(3), Jenkins C(4), Fucile S(5), Fogel 
R(5), Shen S(5), Goyal P(6), Mezzi K(6), Kostikas K(7).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Division, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, UK. j.wedzicha@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Crete, 
Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(4)The George Institute for Global Health, Sydney, Australia.
(5)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(6)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Respiratory Medicine Department, University of Ioannina Medical School, 
Ioannina, Greece.

BACKGROUND: The burden of chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD) is increasing 
in women, with recent evidence suggesting gender differences in disease 
characteristics and potentially in treatment outcomes.
METHODS: FLAME was a 52-week randomized controlled trial in patients with 
severe-to-very-severe COPD and a history of exacerbations. In this post-hoc 
analysis, gender-based baseline differences and treatment outcomes between 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium 110/50 μg once daily (IND/GLY) and 
salmeterol/fluticasone 50/500 twice daily (SFC) were assessed in terms of rate 
of exacerbations, time-to-first exacerbation, lung function, health status, and 
rescue medication use.
RESULTS: This post-hoc analysis included 2557 men and 805 women. Baseline 
characteristics differed between genders, with women being younger, having 
better lung function and more often experiencing ≥2 exacerbations in the 
previous year. Compared with SFC, IND/GLY treatment was associated with 
reductions in the annualized rates of moderate/severe exacerbations (rate ratio 
[95% CI]: 0.81 [0.73-0.91], 0.89 [0.74-1.07] in men and women, respectively). 
Similarly, time-to-first moderate/severe exacerbation was also delayed (hazard 
ratio [95% CI]: 0.79 [0.70-0.89] and 0.76 [0.63-0.91] in men and women, 
respectively). Results were similar for all (mild/moderate/severe) 
exacerbations. Improvements in lung function, health status and rescue 
medication use with IND/GLY vs SFC were comparable between men and women. The 
smaller sample size for women may account for some observed discrepancies in 
treatment responses.
CONCLUSIONS: Although there were gender differences in baseline characteristics, 
IND/GLY demonstrated similar trends for exacerbation prevention and lung 
function improvement in men and women with moderate-to-very-severe COPD and a 
history of exacerbations compared with SFC. Small differences in the effects 
seen between genders may be attributed to the different sizes of the two groups 
and need to be further evaluated in randomized trials that are appropriately 
powered for gender analysis.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Post hoc analysis of the FLAME study. ClinicalTrials.gov 
number: NCT01782326 . Registered 1 February 2013.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-0972-7
PMCID: PMC6325763
PMID: 30621717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
FLAME study protocol and all amendments were reviewed by an Independent Ethics 
Committee or Institutional Review Board for each center in each country (Japan, 
Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway, Philippines, Poland, 
Portugal, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan, 
Turkey, United Kingdom, Thailand, Croatia, Serbia, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, 
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, 
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, India, 
Italy). The study was conducted as per the guidelines in the Declaration of 
Helsinki and Good Clinical Practice guidelines. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: Jadwiga A. Wedzicha (JAW) has not received any 
speaker or consulting fees since January 2015. She has received research grants 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, and Johnson 
and Johnson. Dave Singh (DS) reports grants and personal fees from Almirall, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, Johnson 
and Johnson, Merck, NAPP, Novartis, Pfizer, Takeda, Teva, Theravance, and 
Verona, and personal fees from Genentech and Skyepharma. Ioanna Tsiligianni (IT) 
has received honoraria for educational activities, speaking engagements and 
advisory boards from Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, AstraZeneca and 
GlaxoSmithKline. Christine Jenkins (CJ) reports personal fees from Novartis 
Pharma AG, during the conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline, personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Menarini, 
outside the submitted work. Robert Fogel (RF), Sebastian Fucile (SF), Steven 
Shen (SS), Pankaj Goyal (PG), Karen Mezzi (KM) are employees and shareholders of 
the analysis sponsor, Novartis. Konstantinos Kostikas (KK) was an employee of 
Novartis Pharma AG at the time of the conduct of this study. None of the authors 
received any compensation for the development of the manuscript. PUBLISHER’S 
NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


95. Clin Respir J. 2019 Dec;13(12):735-740. doi: 10.1111/crj.13083. Epub 2019 Aug 
30.

Extra-respiratory symptoms in patients hospitalized for a COPD exacerbation: 
Prevalence, clinical burden and their impact on functional status.

Antoniu SA(1), Apostol A(2), Boiculese LV(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine II-Nursing/Palliative Care, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy Grigore T Popa, Iasi, Romania.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Grigore T Popa, 
Iasi, Romania.
(3)Department of Interdisciplinarity-Biostatistics, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy Grigore T Popa, Iasi, Romania.

INTRODUCTION: In COPD management, the improvement of the health status by 
alleviating respiratory symptoms is among the main aims. However, little is 
known on the prevalence and burden of extra-respiratory symptoms which can also 
be distressing especially during a COPD exacerbation.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the prevalence of extra-respiratory symptoms and their 
impact on health and functional statuses in patients hospitalized for a COPD 
exacerbation.
METHODS: Health status was evaluated with the COPD Assessment Test (CAT), 
functional status with Karnofsky index, and presence and severity of respiratory 
symptoms were evaluated with Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale (ESAS).
RESULTS: In a sample of 47 patients, fatigue was found to be the most prevalent 
95.7% followed by pain 74.5%, lack of appetite 72.3%, depression and anxiety 
(each in 63.8%), drowsiness 59.6% and nausea 31.9%. The concomitant presence of 
an increasing number of symptoms (three, four, five, six or seven) was 
individually associated with worse health status or of functional status (eg, 
CAT score in patients with three most prevalent symptoms, fatigue, pain and lack 
of appetite 29.6 vs 25.1, P = .006 in patients without them; Karnofsky index 
scores in patients with the four most prevalent symptoms 52 vs 65.6, P = .001). 
Linear regressions confirmed that the increase in the number of concomitant 
extra-respiratory symptoms significantly correlated with the worsening of 
health/functional status. In conclusion, the burden of extra-respiratory 
symptoms in patients with hospitalized for a COPD exacerbation is significant 
and impact significantly on health/functional status.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13083
PMID: 31437358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Rev Med Interne. 2019 Jun;40(6):368-372. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2019.02.005. Epub 
2019 Mar 8.

[Azithromycine and chronic bronchial diseases: For which patients? For which 
benefits? With what modalities?].

[Article in French]

Pronost P(1), Tromeur C(2).

Author information:
(1)Département de médecine interne et pneumologie, hôpital de la Cavale-Blanche, 
CHRU de Brest, boulevard Tanguy-Prigent, 29200 Brest, France. Electronic 
address: paulinepronost@orange.fr.
(2)Département de médecine interne et pneumologie, hôpital de la Cavale-Blanche, 
CHRU de Brest, boulevard Tanguy-Prigent, 29200 Brest, France; Groupe d'étude de 
la thrombose de Bretagne Occidentale, équipe d'accueil 3878, CHRU de Brest, 
29200 Brest, France; Centre d'investigation clinique, Inserm 1412, université de 
Bretagne Occidentale, 29200 Brest, France.

Azithromycin is a macrolide widely used in chronic bronchial diseases due to its 
anti-inflammatory properties. This treatment is prescribed to patients with 
bronchiectasis, asthma and severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who 
present more than 3 exacerbations per year or a deterioration of respiratory 
function despite an optimal treatment. Macrolides decrease the number of 
exacerbation but azythromycine must be prescribed carefully. Indeed, it involves 
potential cardiovascular and otological toxicities and the emergence of 
resistant bacteria. In addition, studies remain insufficient to establish the 
optimal dosage and duration of azithromycine.

Copyright © 2019 Société Nationale Française de Médecine Interne (SNFMI). 
Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2019.02.005
PMID: 30857823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Emergencias. 2019 Feb;31(1):21-26.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease assessment test: usefulness for monitoring 
recovery and predicting poor course of disease after exacerbations.

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Pulido Herrero E(1), García Gutiérrez S(2), Antón Ladislao A(2), Piñera Salmerón 
P(3), Martín Corral MJ(2), Gorordo Unzueta MI(4), Lopetegui Eraso P(5), García 
Lamberechts EJ(6), Quintana López JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Urgencias, OSI-Barrualdea-Galdakao, Galdakao, Bizkaia. Red de 
Investigación en Servicios de Salud en Enfermedades Crónicas [REDISSEC], 
Galdakao, Bizkaia, España. Unidad de Investigación, OSI Barrualde-Galdakao, 
Galdakao, Bizkaia. Red de Investigación en Servicios de Salud en Enfermedades 
Crónicas [REDISSEC], Galdakao, Bizkaia, España.
(2)Unidad de Investigación, OSI Barrualde-Galdakao, Galdakao, Bizkaia2 Red de 
Investigación en Servicios de Salud en Enfermedades Crónicas [REDISSEC], 
Galdakao, Bizkaia, España.
(3)Servicio de Urgencias, Hospital Reina Sofía, Murcia, España.
(4)Servicio de Neumologia, OSI Barrualde_Galdakao, Galdakao, Bizkaia, España.
(5)Servicio de Urgencias Hospital de Txagorritxu, Vitoria, Alava,España.
(6)Servicio de Urgencias del Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, España.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the usefulness of the chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) assessment test (CAT) for evaluating recovery from an acute 
exacerbation of chronic COPD. To assess whether the CAT score used along with a 
COPD exacerbation severity scale can better predict risk of a poor course of 
disease.
METHODS: Prospective multicenter cohort study enrolling patients who attended 
hospital emergency departments with symptoms of exacerbated COPD. We recorded 
sociodemographic and clinical data and information from 2 questionnaires: the 
CAT and the modified dyspnea scale of the Medical Research Council (mMRC). 
Measures of clinical outcome in this study were the CAT score 2 months after the 
COPD exacerbation and poor course of disease during the hospital stay or 1 week 
after discharge from the emergency department if patients were not hospitalized.
RESULTS: The cohort included 501 patients. The median (interquartile range) CAT 
score was 13 (7-18) on the day before the exacerbation, 25 (19-30) during 
emergency care for the exacerbation, and 13 (7-18) 2 months later. The 
difference between the CAT scores before the exacerbation and 2 months later was 
not statistically significant when the cohort was stratified by severity of 
baseline COPD (mild, moderate, and severe/very severe) (P=.585, P=.419, and 
P=.4357). The short-term course of disease was poor for 91 patients (18.16%). 
Combining the mMRC and the CAT scores to predict poor short-term outcome gave an 
area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.701 (95% CI, 
0.640-0.762). The AUC for the mMRC score without the CAT score was 0.667 (95% 
CI, 0.616- 0.737). The difference between the AUCs was not statistically 
significant (P=.088).
CONCLUSION: The CAT score may be useful for monitoring recovery from a COPD 
exacerbation. Combining the CAT score and a COPD severity score may be useful 
for predicting clinical course after an exacerbation.

Publisher: OBJETIVO: Evaluar la utilidad del cuestionario COPD Asessment Test 
(CAT) para valorar la recuperación de la exacerbación de la enfermedad pulmonar 
obstructiva crónica (EA-EPOC). Evaluar si la puntuación CAT aumenta la capacidad 
predictiva de mala evolución de una escala de gravedad para EA-EPOC.
METODO: Estudio de cohortes prospectivo multicéntrico. Se reclutaron pacientes 
que consultaron en los servicios de urgencias hospitalarios (SUH) participantes 
con síntomas compatibles con EA-EPOC. Se recogieron variables sociodemográficas, 
datos clínicos, cuestionario CAT y escala de disnea modificada del Medical 
Research Council (mMRC). Las variables resultado fueron: puntuación CAT dos 
meses tras EA-EPOC y mala evolución durante el ingreso o una semana después en 
pacientes dados de alta directamente desde los SUH.
RESULTADOS: Se incluyeron 501 pacientes. La mediana (RIC) de la puntuación CAT 
fue de 13 (RIC 7-18) en el día previo a EA-EPOC, 25 (19-30) en el momento de la 
consulta por EA-EPOC, y 13 (7-18) a dos meses. La diferencia entre la puntuación 
CAT el día previo a EA-EPOC y 2 meses del cuestionario no fue estadísticamente 
significativa según la gravedad de la EPOC basal, leve, moderada y grave-muy 
grave (p = 0,585, p = 0,419 y p = 0,436). Presentaron una mala evolución a corto 
plazo 91 pacientes (18,2%). La escala de gravedad con el cuestionario CAT obtuvo 
un área bajo la curva de la característica operativa del receptor de 0,701 (IC 
95% 0,640-0,762) y sin el cuestionario CAT de 0,667 (IC 95% 0,616-0,737), esta 
diferencia no fue estadísticamente significativa (p = 0,088).
CONCLUSIONES: La escala CAT puede ser una herramienta de utilidad a la hora de 
supervisar la recuperación de la EAEPOC. Su inclusión como variable predictora 
en una escala de gravedad podría ser de utilidad clínica.

PMID: 30656869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Respir Res. 2019 Dec 3;20(1):273. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1219-3.

Does a tailored intervention to promote adherence in patients with chronic lung 
disease affect exacerbations? A randomized controlled trial.

Gregoriano C(1)(2), Dieterle T(3)(4), Breitenstein AL(3), Dürr S(3), Baum A(3), 
Giezendanner S(5), Maier S(3), Leuppi-Taegtmeyer A(4)(6), Arnet I(7), Hersberger 
KE(7), Leuppi JD(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)University Clinic of Medicine, Cantonal Hospital Baselland, Rheinstrasse 26, 
CH - 4410, Liestal, Switzerland. c.gregoriano@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland. c.gregoriano@gmail.com.
(3)University Clinic of Medicine, Cantonal Hospital Baselland, Rheinstrasse 26, 
CH - 4410, Liestal, Switzerland.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Centre for Primary Health Care, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Poor medication-adherence is common in chronic lung patients, 
resulting in reduced health-outcomes and increased healthcare-costs. This study 
aimed to investigate the impact of an acoustic reminder and support calls on 
adherence to inhaled therapy in asthma and COPD patients and to determine their 
effect on exacerbations.
METHODS: This single-blinded randomized controlled trial investigated asthma and 
COPD patients during 6 months in an ambulatory setting. The intervention 
consisted of daily alarm clock and support phone calls, whenever use of rescue 
medication doubled or inhaled medication was not taken as prescribed. Primary 
outcome was time to next exacerbation. Frequency of exacerbations, adherence to 
inhaled medication and quality of life scores were secondary outcomes. Cox and 
Poisson regression were used to determine intervention effect on time to 
exacerbation and frequency of exacerbations, respectively.
RESULTS: Seventy-five participants were assigned to the intervention group and 
74 to usual follow-up care. During a median follow-up of 6.2 months, 22 and 28% 
in the intervention and control groups respectively, experienced at least one 
exacerbation. Intervention had no effect on time to first exacerbation (HR 0.65, 
95% CI 0.21 to 2.07, P = .24), but showed a trend toward a 39% decreased 
frequency of exacerbations (RR = 0.61, 95% CI 0.35 to 1.03, P = .070) for the 
adjusted models, respectively. The intervention group had significantly more 
days with 80-100% taking adherence regarding puff inhalers (82 ± 14% vs. 
60 ± 30%, P < .001) and dry powder capsules (90 ± .10% vs. 80 ± 21%, P = .01). 
Timing adherence in participants using puff inhalers was higher in the 
intervention group (69 ± 25% vs. 51 ± 33%, P < .001). No significant differences 
in QoL were found between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Participants assigned to the intervention group had significantly 
better taking and timing adherence of inhaled medication resulting in a trend 
towards a decreased frequency of exacerbations. However, no effect on time to 
next exacerbation was observed.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02386722, Registered 14 February 
2014.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1219-3
PMCID: PMC6892023
PMID: 31796013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


99. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2019 Nov 12;42(11):826-831. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1001-0939.2019.11.008.

[The clinical analysis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients 
complicated with nontuberculous mycobacterial pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Sun YX(1), Shao C(1), Li S(1), Xu K(2), Huang H(1), Xu ZJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Beijing 100730, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing 
100730, China.

Objectives: Long-term use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) was reported as a 
risk factor for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
complicated with nontuberculous mycobacterial lung disease (NTM-LD). But it was 
not reported often in China. Methods: We conducted a retrospective analysis of 
patients who were diagnosed with COPD and NTM-LD in our department from January 
1(st) 2017 to December 31(th) 2018. Results: This study consisted of 10 male and 
5 female patients with a mean age of (66±7) years. The detailed clinical data 
and radiological images were reviewed systemically. There were 4 current smokers 
(26.7%) and 6 past smokers (40%). All cases were current ICS users, with a mean 
duration of (27.3±9.7) months, ranging from 3 months to 61 months. Among them, 8 
cases (53.3%) used inhaled fluticasone and 7 cases (46.7%) used inhaled 
budesonide. Aggravated coughing (15 cases, 100%), expectoration (15 cases, 100%) 
and dyspnea (10 cases, 66.7%) were the common clinical manifestations, although 
fever was only reported in 4 cases (26.7%). All cases showed normal white blood 
cell count and lymphocyte count, and some of them (7 cases, 46.7%) showed 
elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein. Most of them (14 
cases, 93.3%) had normal TB-SPOT results. Multiple focal bronchiectasis (9 
cases, 60%) and significant emphysema (12 cases, 80%) were the common 
manifestations of basic high-resolution CT (HRCT) prior NTM infection. The 
occurrence of bronchiectasis (15 cases, 100%), "tree in bud" sign (12 cases, 
80%) and tiny cavities (8 cases, 53.3%) were the common HRCT abnormalities for 
the NTM-LD cases. According to the 2007's NTM-LD diagnosis criteria, most of 
them (13 cases, 86.7%) were diagnosed with positive sputum samples at least 
twice, and 2 cases were diagnosed with positive CT-directed bronchial alveolar 
lavage fluid. NTM-PCR analysis was performed routinely for the isolated NTM 
samples to identify the NTM species. Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) was the 
most common NTM species (8 cases, 53.3%). After treatment with proposed anti-NTM 
strategies, most cases improved (9 cases, 60%), and some of them (4 cases, 
26.7%) were cured and a few cases (2 cases, 13.3%) relapsed. Conclusions: When 
COPD patients treated with ICS showed aggravated cough, expectation and/or 
dyspnea, and new occurrence of bronchiectasis and/or "tree in bud" sign in the 
recent HRCT, the differential diagnosis of NTM-LD should be considered. 
Respiratory samples should be arranged for NTM cultures and PCR analysis as soon 
as possible. Earlier antimicrobial strategies according to the identified NTM 
species would improve the clinical outcomes.

Publisher: 目的： 分析长期吸入糖皮质激素（激素）的慢性阻塞性肺疾病（慢阻肺）患者继发非结核分枝杆菌肺病的临床特点。 方法： 
回顾性分析2017年1月至2018年12月在我院诊治的慢阻肺并发非结核分枝杆菌肺病患者的临床-影像学资料。共纳入有完整的临床-肺功能-胸部HRCT资料（基线及感染非结核分枝杆菌后）的慢阻肺患者15例，男10例，女5例，年龄平均（66±7）岁。 
结果： 
15例中仍吸烟者4例，已戒烟既往有吸烟史6例，5例无吸烟史。所有患者均正在使用吸入激素，其中氟替卡松8例，布地奈德7例；疗程3~61个月，平均（27±10）个月。咳嗽、咯痰增加（15/15）及呼吸困难加重（10/15）是常见的临床表现，但发热并不常见（4/15）。所有患者外周血白细胞及淋巴细胞计数均正常，部分ESR及C反应蛋白升高（7/15），绝大部分患者（14/15）外周血结核感染T细胞斑点试验正常。多数患者基线胸部HRCT有不同程度和形式的肺结构破坏，其中多灶性支气管扩张9例，明显肺气肿12例。发生非结核分枝杆菌感染后，胸部HRCT以新发支气管扩张（15/15）、"树芽征"（12/15）及小空洞影（8/15）多见。大部分经痰培养明确病原（13/15），仅2例经BALF培养明确诊断（2/15）。非结核分枝杆菌的菌种以鸟/胞内分枝杆菌为主（8/15）。结合菌种鉴定结果给予针对性抗感染治疗后，大部分好转（9/15），部分治愈（4/15），少数复发（2/15）。 
结论： 
长期吸入激素治疗的慢阻肺患者若出现咳嗽、咯痰及呼吸困难加重，但发热并不明显、复查胸部CT提示新发支气管扩张、"树芽征"时，需要排查结核或非结核分枝杆菌感染的可能，及时送检痰结核菌培养、菌种鉴定或DNA测序等，以尽早明确诊断、针对性抗感染治疗，改善患者的预后。.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.1001-0939.2019.11.008
PMID: 31694092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 May 3;14:939-951. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S188898. eCollection 2019.

Long-term cost and utility consequences of short-term clinically important 
deterioration in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: results 
from the TORCH study.

Paly VF(1), Naya I(2), Gunsoy NB(3), Driessen MT(4), Risebrough N(5), Briggs 
A(6), Ismaila AS(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)ICON Health Economics, ICON, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(3)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(4)Value Evidence & Outcomes, GSK, Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(5)ICON Health Economics, ICON, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Health Economics and Health Technology Assessment, Institute of Health and 
Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(7)Value Evidence & Outcomes, GSK, Collegeville, PA, USA.
(8)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

Purpose: Clinically important deterioration (CID) in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) is a novel composite endpoint that assesses disease 
stability. The association between short-term CID and future economic and 
quality of life (QoL) outcomes has not been previously assessed. This analysis 
considers 3-year data from the TOwards a Revolution in COPD Health (TORCH) 
study, to examine this question. Patients and methods: This post hoc analysis of 
TORCH (NCT00268216) compared costs and utilities at 3 years among patients 
without CID (CID-) and with CID (CID+) at 24 weeks. A positive CID status was 
defined as either: a deterioration in forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
(FEV1) of ≥100 mL from baseline; or a ≥4-unit increase from baseline in St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score; or the incidence of a 
moderate/severe exacerbation. Patients from all treatment arms were included. 
Utility change was based on the EQ-5D utility index. Costs were based on 
healthcare resource utilization from 24 weeks to end of follow-up combined with 
unit costs for the UK (2016 GBP), and reported as per patient per year (PPPY). 
Adjusted estimates were generated controlling for baseline characteristics, 
treatment assignment, and number of CID criteria met. Results: Overall, 3,769 
patients completed the study and were included in the analysis (stable CID- 
patients, n=1,832; unstable CID+ patients, n=1,937). At the end of follow-up, 
CID- patients had higher mean (95% confidence interval [CI]) utility scores than 
CID+ patients (0.752 [0.738, 0.765] vs 0.697 [0.685, 0.71]; difference +0.054; 
P<0.001), and lower costs PPPY (£538 vs £916; difference: £378 [95% CI: £244, 
£521]; P<0.001). The cost differential was primarily driven by the difference in 
general hospital ward days (P=0.003). Conclusion: This study demonstrated that 
achieving early stability in COPD by preventing short-term CID is associated 
with better preservation of future QoL alongside reduced healthcare service 
costs.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S188898
PMCID: PMC6524132
PMID: 31190781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IN, NBG, and ASI are employees of GSK, and hold 
stock/shares in GSK. ASI is also an unpaid professor at McMaster University in 
Canada. MTD was employed by GSK at the time of this study. VFP and NR are 
employees of ICON Health Economics, who were contracted by GSK to conduct the 
study analysis. AB received consultancy fees from GSK and ICON Health Economics 
in relation to this study. AB and ICON employees were not paid for manuscript 
development. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


101. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2019 Apr 9;6(2):154-165. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.6.2.2018.0152. Epub 2019 Apr 9.

Improvements in Lung Function with Nebulized Revefenacin in the Treatment of 
Patients with Moderate to Very Severe COPD: Results from Two Replicate Phase III 
Clinical Trials.

Ferguson GT(1), Feldman G(2), Pudi KK(3), Barnes CN(4), Moran EJ(4), Haumann 
B(4), Pendyala S(4), Crater G(4).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills.
(2)South Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Spartanburg.
(3)Sherman Clinical Research, Sherman, Texas.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, California.

BACKGROUND: Revefenacin, a novel, lung-selective, long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist, has been developed for nebulized therapy for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). We present the results of replicate Phase III efficacy 
and safety studies of revefenacin in patients with moderate to very severe COPD.
METHODS: In 2 double-blind, parallel-group studies, (Study 0126 and Study 0127), 
patients ≥ 40 years old were randomized to revefenacin 88 μg, revefenacin 175 μg 
or placebo administered once daily by standard jet nebulizer for 12 weeks. The 
primary endpoint was 24-hour trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 
on day 85. Secondary efficacy endpoints included overall treatment effect (OTE) 
on trough FEV1 and peak FEV1 (0-2 hours after first dose). Safety assessments 
included treatment-emergent adverse events.
RESULTS: At day 85, revefenacin 88 µg and 175 µg improved trough FEV1 versus 
placebo in Study 0126 (by 79 mL [p=0.0003] and 146 mL [p<0.0001]) and Study 0127 
(by 160 mL and 147 mL; both p<0.0001). Compared with placebo, pooled data of 
revefenacin 88 µg and 175 µg increased OTE trough FEV1 by 115 mL and 142 mL 
(both p<0.001) and increased peak FEV1 by 127 mL and 129 mL (both p<0.0001). 
Revefenacin 175 µg demonstrated greater improvements in FEV1 in concomitant 
long-acting beta2-agonist patients and in more severe patients than revefenacin 
88 µg. Adverse events were minor.
CONCLUSION: Revefenacin, administered once daily for 12 weeks to patients with 
moderate to very severe COPD, demonstrated clinically significant improvements 
in trough FEV1 and OTE FEV1. Revefenacin was generally well tolerated with no 
major safety concerns.

JCOPDF © 2019.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.6.2.2018.0152
PMCID: PMC6596436
PMID: 30974049

Conflict of interest statement: GTF has received grants, served on advisory 
boards, received consulting fees and/or received speaking fees from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Circassia, Forest, GlaxoSmithKline, Innoviva, Meda, Mylan, 
Novartis, Pearl Therapeutics, Sanofi, Sunovion, Theravance Biopharma and Verona. 
GF and KKP have nothing to declare. CNB, EJM, BH, SP and GC are employees of 
Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. Mylan Inc., (Canonsburg, Pennsylvania) and 
Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., (South San Francisco, California) funded medical 
writing support.


102. J Pharm Pract. 2019 Aug 25:897190019867241. doi: 10.1177/0897190019867241. 
Online ahead of print.

Effects of Pharmacist-Conducted Medication Reconciliation at Discharge on 30-Day 
Readmission Rates of Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Singh D(1), Fahim G(2)(3), Ghin HL(3), Mathis S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)1 University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)2 Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway Township, NJ, USA.
(3)3 Monmouth Medical Center, Long Branch, NJ, USA.
(4)4 Monmouth Southern Campus, Lakewood, NJ, USA.

PURPOSE: To analyze effect of pharmacist-conducted medication reconciliation on 
30-day readmission rates in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and 
identify common medication errors among patient with readmissions.
METHODS: Pharmacists were educated on discharge medication reconciliation for 
patients with COPD. A retrospective chart review was conducted on patients who 
underwent pharmacist-conducted discharge medication reconciliation to determine 
30-day readmissions. Medication errors analyzed included medication omissions 
and dose or frequency errors. Previously collected internal research without 
pharmacist-conducted medication reconciliation served as the control.
RESULTS: There were 65 patients in the control group and 50 in the intervention 
group. About 25% of patients in the control group and 26% of patients in the 
intervention group had any cause readmissions within 30 days of discharge (P = 
.87). Both the control and the intervention group had similar COPD-related 
readmissions of 12.3% and 12.6%, respectively. Medication dose or frequency 
errors consisted of 68.9% and 46.7% of total errors in the control and the 
intervention groups, respectively. Long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) or 
long-acting beta 2-agonist (LABA) were the most common drug classes to be 
incorrectly dosed or omitted at discharge. In the intervention group, 30 errors 
were identified. Due to inability to coordinate discharges, pharmacists 
intervened on 13 errors, 7 of which were accepted by the prescriber.
CONCLUSION: Pharmacist-conducted medication reconciliation at discharge did not 
affect 30-day readmission rates of patients with COPD. Confounding factors 
included a small sample size, passive pharmacist education, and discharge 
issues. The most common medication errors at discharge were dosing or frequency 
errors of LABAs or LAMAs.

DOI: 10.1177/0897190019867241
PMID: 31446826


103. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 2;14:2767-2775. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S234774. eCollection 2019.

Critical Inhaler Handling Error Is an Independent Risk Factor for Frequent 
Exacerbations of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Interim Results of a 
Single Center Prospective Study.

Ahn JH(1), Chung JH(1), Shin KC(1), Choi EY(1), Jin HJ(1), Lee MS(1), Nam MJ(1), 
Lee KH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonology and Allergy, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Yeungnam University Medical Center, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, 
Daegu, South Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) acute exacerbations are 
significant causes of morbidity and mortality. "Frequent exacerbator" phenotypes 
are considered a distinct subgroup and this phenotype has a negative effect on 
lung function, quality of life, activity, hospital admission, and mortality. We 
assess inhaler handling technique and adherence, and evaluate risk factors 
associated with frequent exacerbations in COPD patients.
METHODS: This study was a cross-sectional, case-control study. We prospectively 
enrolled 189 COPD patients from Yeungnam University Hospital from January 2018 
to November 2018. Subjects were tested regarding their inhaler technique in 
face-to-face interviews with an advanced practice nurse of inhaler upon study 
entry. Frequency of moderate to severe COPD exacerbations were reviewed via 
electronic medical records during 12 months prior to study entry. Frequent 
exacerbations were defined as ≥2 moderate to severe exacerbations in the prior 
12 months. Multivariate logistic regression was performed to identify risk 
factors for frequent exacerbations.
RESULTS: Among 189 COPD patients, 50 (26.5%) were frequent exacerbators. Based 
on univariate analyses, body mass index (BMI) < 25 kg/m2, lower forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), higher mMRC, lower feeling of satisfaction with 
the inhaler, and any critical errors were potential risk factors for frequent 
exacerbations. Multivariate logistic regression analyses revealed that BMI < 25 
kg/m2 (OR, 2.855, 95% CI, 1.247-6.534; p=0.013), higher mMRC (OR, 1.625, 95% CI, 
1.072-2.463; p=0.022), and any critical error (OR, 2.020, 95% CI, 1.021-3.999; 
p=0.044) were risk factors.
CONCLUSION: Any critical error, BMI < 25 kg/m2 and high mMRC are independent 
risk factors for frequent exacerbations in COPD patients. Careful monitoring and 
education around inhaler devices, particularly in frequent exacerbators, are 
important components of COPD treatment.

© 2019 Ahn et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S234774
PMCID: PMC6896926
PMID: 31819409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.


104. Respir Res. 2019 Aug 16;20(1):186. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1163-2.

Decline of COPD exacerbations in clinical trials over two decades - a systematic 
review and meta-regression.

Andreas S(1)(2), Röver C(3), Heinz J(3), Straube S(4), Watz H(5), Friede T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology and Pneumology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany. stefan.andreas@med.uni-goettingen.de.
(2)Lung Clinic Immenhausen, Immenhausen, Germany. 
stefan.andreas@med.uni-goettingen.de.
(3)Department of Medical Statistics, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Division of Preventive Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(5)Pulmonary Research Institute at LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research 
Center North (ARCN), German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Grosshansdorf, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: An important goal of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
treatment is to reduce the frequency of exacerbations. Some observations suggest 
a decline in exacerbation rates in clinical trials over time. A more systematic 
understanding would help to improve the design and interpretation of COPD 
trials.
METHODS: We performed a systematic review and meta-regression of the placebo 
groups in published randomized controlled trials reporting exacerbations as an 
outcome. A Bayesian negative binomial model was developed to accommodate results 
that are reported in different formats; results are reported with credible 
intervals (CI) and posterior tail probabilities (pB).
RESULTS: Of 1114 studies identified by our search, 55 were ultimately included. 
Exacerbation rates decreased by 6.7% (95% CI (4.4, 9.0); pB <  0.001) per year, 
or 50% (95% CI (36, 61)) per decade. Adjusting for available study and baseline 
characteristics such as forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) did not alter the 
observed trend considerably. Two subsets of studies, one using a true placebo 
group and the other allowing inhaled corticosteroids in the "placebo" group, 
also yielded consistent results.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this meta-regression indicates that the rate of COPD 
exacerbations decreased over the past two decades to a clinically relevant 
extent independent of important prognostic factors. This suggests that care is 
needed in the design of new trials or when comparing results from older trials 
with more recent ones. Also a considerable effect of adjunct therapy on COPD 
exacerbations can be assumed.
REGISTRATION: PROSPERO 2018 CRD4218118823.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1163-2
PMCID: PMC6697937
PMID: 31420040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Andreas reports other from Stiftung 
Oskar-Helene-Heim, during the conduct of the study; grants and personal fees 
from Boehringer Ing, grants from Pfizer, personal fees from Novartis, personal 
fees from Astra Zeneca, personal fees from GSK, personal fees from Chiesi, 
personal fees from Merini, outside the submitted work. Dr. Röver has nothing to 
disclose. Dr. Heinz has nothing to disclose. Dr. Straube reports grants and 
personal fees from Workers’ Compensation Board of Alberta, personal fees from 
Canadian Board of Occupational Medicine, outside the submitted work. Dr. Watz 
reports personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Bayer, personal fees 
from AstraZeneca, personal fees from Roche, personal fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, personal fees from GSK, personal fees from BerlinChemie, personal 
fees from Chiesi, outside the submitted work. Dr. Friede reports personal fees 
from Novartis, personal fees from Bayer, personal fees from AstraZeneca, 
personal fees from Janssen, personal fees from SGS, personal fees from Roche, 
personal fees from Mediconomics, personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
personal fees from Daiichi-Sankyo, personal fees from Galapagos, personal fees 
from Penumbra, personal fees from Parexel, outside the submitted work.


105. J Thorac Dis. 2019 Oct;11(Suppl 17):S2200-S2209. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2019.10.57.

Airway pharmacology: treatment options and algorithms to treat patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kerstjens HAM(1), Upham JW(2), Yang IA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Princess Alexandra Hospital, and Faculty 
of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(3)Thoracic Program, The Prince Charles Hospital, Metro North Hospital and 
Health Service, and Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia.

Pharmacological treatment of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) aims to reduce disease burden and prevent future risk, especially 
exacerbations, hospitalizations, decline of lung function and quality of life, 
and mortality. This review will describe the basic pharmacology of the different 
classes of agents, followed by the effects they exert in patients with COPD, and 
the side effects. Targets for pharmacological treatments include airway smooth 
muscle contraction, inflammation, mucus production, alpha-1-antitrypsin 
deficiency and respiratory infection. Inhaled bronchodilators are the mainstay, 
with methylxanthines as secondary choice agents. Anti-inflammatory therapy can 
be administered as corticosteroids, phosphodiesterase inhibitor, and long-term 
macrolides such as azithromycin. Mucus production is addressed by use of 
mucolytics. In some countries, alpha-1-antitrypsin augmentation therapy is 
available for severe alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency. The treatment of bacterial 
infection and/or colonization can be attempted with antibiotics; there is a dire 
need for effective anti-viral agents for the common viruses causing 
exacerbations of COPD. Since clinicians need to choose medications for their 
individual patients, algorithms for how to choose and change medication are 
increasingly being presented with more elements of treatable traits and 
personalized medicine.

2019 Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.10.57
PMCID: PMC6831916
PMID: 31737347

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: HA Kerstjens reports 
research grants from GSK, Novartis, and Boehringer, and fees for consultancies 
in advisory boards from other from GSK, Novartis, and Boehringer, all paid to 
his institution. JW Upham has served on Advisory Boards for GSK, AZ, Novartis 
and Boehringer Ingelheim and has received speaker fees from GSK, AZ, Novartis 
and Boehringer Ingelheim. IA Yang has no conflicts of interest to declare.


106. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 May 23;14:1085-1097. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S190215. eCollection 2019.

Long-term use of inhaled glucocorticoids in patients with stable chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease and risk of bone fractures: a narrative review of 
the literature.

Caramori G(1), Ruggeri P(1), Arpinelli F(2), Salvi L(2), Girbino G(1).

Author information:
(1)Unità Operativa Complessa di Pneumologia, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, 
Odontoiatriche e delle Immagini Morfologiche e Funzionali (BIOMORF), Università 
degli Studi di Messina, Messina, Italy.
(2)Direzione Medica, GSK, Verona, Italy.

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) demonstrate a greater 
osteoporosis prevalence than the general population. This osteoporosis risk may 
be enhanced by treatment with inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs), which are 
recommended for COPD management when combined with long-acting bronchodilators, 
but may also be associated with reduced bone mineral density (BMD). We conducted 
a narrative literature review reporting results of randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs) of an ICS versus placebo over a treatment period of at least 12 months, 
with the aim of providing further insight into the link between bone fractures 
and ICS therapy. As of 16 October 2017, we identified 17 RCTs for inclusion. The 
ICSs studied were budesonide (six studies), fluticasone propionate (five 
studies), mometasone furoate (three studies), beclomethasone dipropionate, 
triamcinolone acetonide, and fluticasone furoate (one each). We found no 
difference in the number of bone fractures among patients receiving ICSs versus 
placebo across the six identified RCTs reporting fracture data. BMD data were 
available for subsets of patients in few studies, and baseline BMD data were 
rare; where these data were given, they were reported for treatment groups 
without stratification for factors known to affect BMD. Risk factors for reduced 
BMD and fractures, such as smoking and physical activity, were also often not 
reported. Furthermore, a standardized definition of the term "fracture" was not 
employed across these studies. The exact relationship between long-term ICS use 
and bone fracture incidence in patients with stable COPD remains unclear in 
light of our review. We have, however, identified several limiting factors in 
existing studies that may form the basis of future RCTs designed specifically to 
explore this relationship.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S190215
PMCID: PMC6536120
PMID: 31190791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: FA is an employee of GSK and owns stock in GSK. 
LS was an employee of GSK at the time of preparation of the manuscript. 
GC reports grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from Astra Zeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, and Menarini Group, and grants from AlfaSigma, 
outside the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


107. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 18;14:447-456. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S191031. eCollection 2019.

Long-term cost-effectiveness of the fixed-dose combination of tiotropium plus 
olodaterol based on the DYNAGITO trial results.

Hoogendoorn M(1), Corro Ramos I(1), Baldwin M(2), Luciani L(3), Fabron C(4), 
Detournay B(4), Rutten-van Mölken MPMH(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)institute for Medical Technology Assessment (iMTA), Erasmus University 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands, hoogendoorn@imta.eur.nl.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim France, Paris, France.
(4)Cemka-Eval, Bourg-la-Reine, France.
(5)Erasmus School of Health Policy & Management (ESHPM), Erasmus University 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Combinations of long-acting bronchodilators are recommended to reduce 
the rate of COPD exacerbations. Evidence from the DYNAGITO trial showed that the 
fixed-dose combination of tiotropium + olodaterol reduced the annual rate of 
total exacerbations (P<0.05) compared with tiotropium monotherapy. This study 
aimed to estimate the cost-effectiveness of the fixed-dose combination of 
tiotropium + olodaterol vs tiotropium monotherapy in COPD patients in the French 
setting.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A recently developed COPD patient-level simulation model 
was used to simulate the lifetime effects and costs for 15,000 patients 
receiving either tiotropium + olodaterol or tiotropium monotherapy by applying 
the reduction in annual exacerbation rate as observed in the DYNAGITO trial. The 
model was adapted to the French setting by including French unit costs for 
treatment medication, COPD maintenance treatment, COPD exacerbations (moderate 
or severe), and pneumonia. The main outcomes were the annual (severe) 
exacerbation rate, the number of quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs), and total 
lifetime costs.
RESULTS: The number of QALYs for treatment with tiotropium + olodaterol was 
0.042 higher compared with tiotropium monotherapy. Using a societal perspective, 
tiotropium + olodaterol resulted in a cost increase of +€123 and an incremental 
cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of €2,900 per QALY compared with tiotropium 
monotherapy. From a French National Sickness Fund perspective, total lifetime 
costs were reduced by €272 with tiotropium + olodaterol, resulting in tiotropium 
+ olodaterol being the dominant treatment option, that is, more effects with 
less costs. Sensitivity analyses showed that reducing the cost of exacerbations 
by 34% increased the ICER to €15,400, which could still be considered 
cost-effective in the French setting.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with tiotropium + olodaterol resulted in a gain in QALYs 
and savings in costs compared with tiotropium monotherapy using a National 
Sickness Fund perspective in France. From the societal perspective, tiotropium + 
olodaterol was found to be cost-effective with a low cost per QALY.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S191031
PMCID: PMC6388779
PMID: 30863045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure MB is employed by Boehringer 
Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany. LL is employed by Boehringer Ingelheim 
France, Paris, France. CF and BD are employed by Cemka-Eval, Bourg-la-Reine, 
France. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


108. Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Jun;198:160-188. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2019.02.013. 
Epub 2019 Feb 26.

Pathobiological mechanisms underlying metabolic syndrome (MetS) in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): clinical significance and therapeutic 
strategies.

Chan SMH(1), Selemidis S(1), Bozinovski S(1), Vlahos R(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Health and Biomedical Sciences, RMIT University, Bundoora, VIC 
3083, Australia.
(2)School of Health and Biomedical Sciences, RMIT University, Bundoora, VIC 
3083, Australia. Electronic address: ross.vlahos@rmit.edu.au.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major incurable global health 
burden and is currently the 4th largest cause of death in the world. 
Importantly, much of the disease burden and health care utilisation in COPD is 
associated with the management of its comorbidities (e.g. skeletal muscle 
wasting, ischemic heart disease, cognitive dysfunction) and infective viral and 
bacterial acute exacerbations (AECOPD). Current pharmacological treatments for 
COPD are relatively ineffective and the development of effective therapies has 
been severely hampered by the lack of understanding of the mechanisms and 
mediators underlying COPD. Since comorbidities have a tremendous impact on the 
prognosis and severity of COPD, the 2015 American Thoracic Society/European 
Respiratory Society (ATS/ERS) Research Statement on COPD urgently called for 
studies to elucidate the pathobiological mechanisms linking COPD to its 
comorbidities. It is now emerging that up to 50% of COPD patients have metabolic 
syndrome (MetS) as a comorbidity. It is currently not clear whether metabolic 
syndrome is an independent co-existing condition or a direct consequence of the 
progressive lung pathology in COPD patients. As MetS has important clinical 
implications on COPD outcomes, identification of disease mechanisms linking COPD 
to MetS is the key to effective therapy. In this comprehensive review, we 
discuss the potential mechanisms linking MetS to COPD and hence plausible 
therapeutic strategies to treat this debilitating comorbidity of COPD.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2019.02.013
PMCID: PMC7112632
PMID: 30822464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Thorax. 2019 Apr;74(4):337-345. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2018-212092. Epub 2019 
Jan 10.

Vitamin D to prevent exacerbations of COPD: systematic review and meta-analysis 
of individual participant data from randomised controlled trials.

Jolliffe DA(1), Greenberg L(1), Hooper RL(1), Mathyssen C(2), Rafiq R(3), de 
Jongh RT(3), Camargo CA(4), Griffiths CJ(1)(5), Janssens W(#)(2), Martineau 
AR(#)(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Primary Care and Public Health, Barts and The London School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Katholieke Universiteit, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Endocrinology, VU University Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, UK.
(5)Asthma UK Centre for Applied Research, Blizard Institute, Queen Mary 
University of London, London, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of vitamin D to prevent COPD 
exacerbations have yielded conflicting results.Individual participant data 
meta-analysis could identify factors that explain this variation.
METHODS: PubMed, Embase, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials and 
Web of Science were searched from inception up to and including 5 October 2017 
to identify RCTs of vitamin D supplementation in patients with COPD that 
reported incidence of acute exacerbations. Individual participant data 
meta-analysis was performed using fixed effects models adjusting for age, sex, 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease spirometric grade and 
trial.
RESULTS: Four eligible RCTs (total 560 participants) were identified; individual 
participant data were obtained for 469/472 (99.4%) participants in three RCTs. 
Supplementation did not influence overall rate of moderate/severe COPD 
exacerbations (adjusted incidence rate ratio (aIRR) 0.94, 95% CI 0.78 to 1.13). 
Prespecified subgroup analysis revealed that protective effects were seen in 
participants with baseline 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels <25 nmol/L (aIRR 0.55, 95% 
CI 0.36 to 0.84) but not in those with baseline 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels 
≥25 nmol/L (aIRR 1.04, 95% CI 0.85 to 1.27; p for interaction=0.015). Vitamin D 
did not influence the proportion of participants experiencing at least one 
serious adverse event (adjusted OR 1.16, 95% CI 0.76 to 1.75).
CONCLUSIONS: Vitamin D supplementation safely and substantially reduced the rate 
of moderate/severe COPD exacerbations in patients with baseline 
25-hydroxyvitamin D levels <25 nmol/L but not in those with higher levels.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42014013953.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2018-212092
PMID: 30630893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


110. Herz. 2019 Sep;44(6):517-521. doi: 10.1007/s00059-019-4834-3.

Pulmonary and cardiac drugs: clinically relevant interactions.

Olschewski H(1), Canepa M(2), Kovacs G(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University 
of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 15, 8036, Graz, Austria. 
horst.olschewski@medunigraz.at.
(2)Cardiovascular Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova, 
Genova, Italy.
(3)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University 
of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 15, 8036, Graz, Austria.

Chronic heart and lung diseases are very common in the elderly population. The 
combination of chronic heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) is also common and, according to current guidelines, these patients 
should be treated for both diseases. In patients with heart failure, 
beta-blockers are very important drugs because their use is associated with 
significantly improved morbidity and mortality. These beneficial effects were 
documented in patients with and without COPD, although theoretically there is a 
risk for bronchoconstriction, particularly with non-beta1 selective blockers. In 
COPD patients, long-acting sympathomimetics (LABA) improve lung function, 
dyspnea, and quality of life and their combination with a beta-blocker makes 
sense from a pharmacological and a clinical point of view, because any potential 
arrhythmogenic effects of the LABA will be ameliorated by the beta-blocker. 
Inhaled tiotropium, a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), has been 
extensively investigated and no safety concerns were reported in terms of 
cardiac adverse effects. The same applies for the other approved LAMA 
preparations and LAMA-LABA combinations. Severe COPD causes air-trapping with 
increasing pressures in the thorax, leading to limitations in blood return into 
the thorax from the periphery of the body. This causes a decrease in stroke 
volume and cardiac index and is associated with dyspnea. All these adverse 
effects can be ameliorated by potent anti-obstructive therapy as recently shown 
by means of a LABA-LAMA combination.

Chronische Herz- und Lungenerkrankungen sind in der älteren Bevölkerung sehr 
verbreitet. Die Kombination von chronischer Herzinsuffizienz und chronischer 
obstruktiver Lungenerkrankung (COPD) ist ebenfalls häufig, und diese Patienten 
sollten, gemäß aktuellen Leitlinien, hinsichtlich beider Erkrankungen behandelt 
werden. Bei Patienten mit Herzinsuffizienz spielen Betablocker eine sehr 
wichtige Rolle, weil ihre Anwendung mit einer signifikant verbesserten 
Morbidität und Mortalität einhergeht. Diese günstigen Auswirkungen wurden sowohl 
bei Patienten mit als auch bei Patienten ohne COPD dokumentiert, obwohl 
theoretisch das Risiko einer Bronchokonstriktion besteht, insbesondere bei 
nicht-beta1-selektiven Blockern. Bei COPD-Patienten führen langwirksame 
Sympathomimetika (LABA) zu einer Verbesserung in Bezug auf Lungenfunktion, 
Dyspnoe und Lebensqualität, und ihre Kombination mit einem Betablocker ist aus 
pharmakologischer und klinischer Sicht sinnvoll, da potenzielle arrhythmogene 
Wirkungen der LABA günstig durch den Betablocker beeinflusst werden. 
Inhalierbares Tiotropium, ein langwirksamer Muskarinantagonist (LAMA), wurde 
umfassend untersucht, es bestätigten sich jedoch keine Sicherheitsbedenken 
hinsichtlich kardialer Nebenwirkungen. Gleiches gilt für die anderen 
zugelassenen LAMA-Präparate und LAMA-LABA-Kombinationen. Eine schwergradige COPD 
verursacht eine Lungenüberblähung mit ansteigendem Druck im Thorax, was zur 
Beeinträchtigung des Blutrückflusses aus der Peripherie des Körpers in den 
Thorax führt. Dies verursacht eine Abnahme des Schlagvolumens und des Herzindex 
und geht mit Dyspnoe einher. All diese Nebenwirkungen können durch eine potente 
antiobstruktive Therapie günstig beeinflusst werden, wie kürzlich mittels einer 
LABA-LAMA-Kombination nachgewiesen wurde.

DOI: 10.1007/s00059-019-4834-3
PMCID: PMC6726702
PMID: 31297545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H. Olschewski, M. Canepa, and G. Kovacs declare 
that they have no competing interests.


111. Eur J Emerg Med. 2019 Oct;26(5):345-349. doi: 10.1097/MEJ.0000000000000571.

Epidemiology of patients presenting with dyspnea to emergency departments in 
Europe and the Asia-Pacific region.

Laribi S(1)(2), Keijzers G(3)(4)(5), van Meer O(6), Klim S(7), Motiejunaite 
J(8)(9)(10), Kuan WS(11), Body R(12)(13), Jones P(14), Karamercan M(15)(16), 
Craig S(17)(18), Harjola VP(19), Holdgate A(20), Golea A(21), Graham C(22), 
Verschuren F(23), Capsec J(2), Christ M(24)(25), Grammatico-Guillon L(1)(2), 
Barletta C(26), Garcia-Castrillo L(27), Kelly AM(28)(29); AANZDEM and EURODEM 
study groups.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Tours University.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Tours University Hospital, Tours.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Gold Coast University Hospital.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences and Medicine, Bond University.
(5)School of Medicine, Griffith University, Gold Coast.
(6)Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(7)Joseph Epstein Centre for Emergency Medicine Research at Western Health, 
Sunshine, Queensland.
(8)INSERM, U942, BIOmarkers in CArdioNeuroVAScular diseases.
(9)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, APHP, Saint Louis 
Lariboisière Hospitals, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Cardiology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences Kaunas 
Clinics, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(11)Department of Emergency Medicine, National University Hospital, National 
University Health System, Singapore.
(12)Emergency Department, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust.
(13)Cardiovascular Sciences Research Group, the University of Manchester, 
Manchester, England.
(14)Department of Adult Emergency Medicine, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, 
New Zealand.
(15)Department of Emergency Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Gazi University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(16)Department of Emergency Medicine, Istanbul Bagcilar Training and Research 
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(17)Emergency Department, Monash Medical Centre.
(18)School of Clinical Sciences at Monash Health, Monash University, Clayton.
(19)Department of Emergency Medicine and Services, Helsinki University Hospital, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(20)Department of Emergency Medicine, Liverpool Hospital, University of New 
South Wales (Southwest Clinical School), Sydney, New South Wales.
(21)Emergency Department of the University County Emergency Hospital, University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania.
(22)Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong 
(SAR).
(23)Department of Acute Medicine, Université Catholique de Louvain, Cliniques 
Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium.
(24)Department of Emergency Care, Luzerner Kantonsspital, Luzern, Switzerland.
(25)Paracelsus Medical University, Nuremberg, Germany.
(26)Department of Emergency Medicine, St. Eugenio Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(27)Servicio Urgencias Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla, Santander, Spain.
(28)Joseph Epstein Centre for Emergency Medicine Research, Western Health.
(29)Department of Medicine, Melbourne Medical School - Western Precinct, The 
University of Melbourne, St. Albans, Victoria, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: The primary objective of this study was to describe the epidemiology 
and management of dyspneic patients presenting to emergency departments (EDs) in 
an international patient population. Our secondary objective was to compare the 
EURODEM and AANZDEM patient populations.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: An observational prospective cohort study was carried out 
in Europe and the Asia-Pacific region. The study included consecutive patients 
presenting to EDs with dyspnea as the main complaint. Data were collected on 
demographics, comorbidities, chronic treatment, clinical signs and 
investigations, treatment in the ED, diagnosis, and disposition from ED.
RESULTS: A total of 5569 patients were included in the study. The most common ED 
diagnoses were lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI) (24.9%), heart failure 
(HF) (17.3%), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation (15.8%), 
and asthma (10.5%) in the overall population. There were more LRTI, HF, and COPD 
exacerbations in the EURODEM population, whereas asthma was more frequent in the 
AANZDEM population. ICU admission rates were 5.5%. ED mortality was 0.6%. The 
overall in-hospital mortality was 5.0%. In-hospital mortality rates were 8.7% 
for LRTI, 7.6% for HF, and 5.6% for COPD patients.
CONCLUSION: Dyspnea as a symptom in the ED has high ward and ICU admission 
rates. A variety of causes of dyspnea were observed in this study, with chronic 
diseases accounting for a major proportion.

DOI: 10.1097/MEJ.0000000000000571
PMID: 30169464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Mar 1;199(5):592-602. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201802-0352OC.

Increased IgA Expression in Lung Lymphoid Follicles in Severe Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Ladjemi MZ(1)(2), Martin C(3)(4), Lecocq M(1)(5), Detry B(1)(2), Nana FA(1), 
Moulin C(1), Weynand B(6), Fregimilicka C(7), Bouzin C(7), Thurion P(8), Carlier 
F(1), Serré J(9), Gayan-Ramirez G(9), Delos M(8), Ocak S(1)(10), Burgel 
PR(3)(4), Pilette C(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)1 Pôle de Pneumologie, ORL & Dermatologie.
(2)2 Institute for Walloon Excellence in Lifesciences and Biotechnology, 
Brussels, Belgium.
(3)3 Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(4)4 Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.
(5)5 Service de Pneumologie, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(6)6 Pathologische Ontleedkunde, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)7 Institut de Recherche Expérimentale & Clinique Imaging Platform, Institut 
de Recherche Expérimentale & Clinique, Université Catholique de Louvain, 
Brussels, Belgium.
(8)8 Service d'anatomopathologie, CHU de Mont-Godinne, Yvoir, Belgium.
(9)9 KU Leuven, Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, Leuven, Belgium; and.
(10)10 Service de Pneumologie, CHU Université Catholique de Louvain Namur (Site 
Godinne), Yvoir, Belgium.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Mar 1;199(5):548-550.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 May 1;199(9):1170-1171.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 May 1;199(9):1171-1172.

RATIONALE: Accumulation of B cells and lymphoid follicles (LFs) has been 
described in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) airways, but the 
functional status of lung B cells remains poorly known.
OBJECTIVES: To characterize LFs for expression of IgA, the main mucosal 
antibody.
METHODS: The presence of B cells and LFs, including intrafollicular IgA 
expression, were determined in the lung from patients with COPD (n = 37) versus 
control subjects (n = 34) by immunohistochemistry. We also evaluated follicular 
IgA responses in the lungs from mice infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PAO1) 
(n = 10 per group) and in smoking mice.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Whereas in smokers B-cell numbers slightly 
increased, robust increases in B-cell and LF numbers (mainly in distal airways) 
were only observed in severe COPD. Most follicular B cells were IgM+ (70-80%), 
but IgA+ (and not IgG+) B-cell numbers were increased in LFs from severe COPD 
compared with control subjects (twofold, 44.7% vs. 25.2%), and this was 
significant in distal but not proximal airways. Follicular IgA response was also 
observed in PAO1-infected mouse lungs, but not after smoke exposure. Moreover, 
follicular IgA expression associated with expression of IL-21, which was very 
potent to activate immunoglobulin production in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that IgA production occurs in peribronchiolar LFs 
from severe COPD, where IL-21-producing T cells are present, and presumably 
represents a feature of exacerbated mucosal adaptive immune responses against 
microbial and/or self-antigens.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201802-0352OC
PMID: 30339768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2019 Apr 18;19(1):86. doi: 10.1186/s12911-019-0805-0.

Identifying clinically important COPD sub-types using data-driven approaches in 
primary care population based electronic health records.

Pikoula M(1)(2), Quint JK(3)(4)(5), Nissen F(3)(5), Hemingway H(6)(3), Smeeth 
L(3)(5), Denaxas S(6)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, 222 Euston Road, 
London, NW1 2DA, UK. m.pikoula@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Health Data Research UK London, University College London, 222 Euston Road, 
London, NW1 2DA, UK. m.pikoula@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)Health Data Research UK London, University College London, 222 Euston Road, 
London, NW1 2DA, UK.
(4)Respiratory Epidemiology, Occupational Medicine and Public Health, National 
Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(5)EHR Research Group, School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(6)Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, 222 Euston Road, 
London, NW1 2DA, UK.

BACKGROUND: COPD is a highly heterogeneous disease composed of different 
phenotypes with different aetiological and prognostic profiles and current 
classification systems do not fully capture this heterogeneity. In this study we 
sought to discover, describe and validate COPD subtypes using cluster analysis 
on data derived from electronic health records.
METHODS: We applied two unsupervised learning algorithms (k-means and 
hierarchical clustering) in 30,961 current and former smokers diagnosed with 
COPD, using linked national structured electronic health records in England 
available through the CALIBER resource. We used 15 clinical features, including 
risk factors and comorbidities and performed dimensionality reduction using 
multiple correspondence analysis. We compared the association between cluster 
membership and COPD exacerbations and respiratory and cardiovascular death with 
10,736 deaths recorded over 146,466 person-years of follow-up. We also 
implemented and tested a process to assign unseen patients into clusters using a 
decision tree classifier.
RESULTS: We identified and characterized five COPD patient clusters with 
distinct patient characteristics with respect to demographics, comorbidities, 
risk of death and exacerbations. The four subgroups were associated with 1) 
anxiety/depression; 2) severe airflow obstruction and frailty; 3) cardiovascular 
disease and diabetes and 4) obesity/atopy. A fifth cluster was associated with 
low prevalence of most comorbid conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: COPD patients can be sub-classified into groups with differing risk 
factors, comorbidities, and prognosis, based on data included in their primary 
care records. The identified clusters confirm findings of previous clustering 
studies and draw attention to anxiety and depression as important drivers of the 
disease in young, female patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-019-0805-0
PMCID: PMC6472089
PMID: 30999919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
protocol for this research was approved by the Independent Scientific Advisory 
Committee (ISAC) for MHRA Database Research (protocol number 16_152Mn) prior to 
receipt of data. Generic ethical approval for observational research using the 
CPRD with approval from ISAC has been granted by a Health Research Authority 
(HRA) Research Ethics Committee (East Midlands – Derby, REC reference number 
05/MRE04/87). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: MP 
has nothing to disclose. JKQ reports grants from MRC, grants and personal fees 
from GSK, grants from Wellcome Trust, grants from The Health Foundation, grants 
from British Lung Foundation, grants and personal fees from Chiesi, grants and 
personal fees from BI, grants and personal fees from AZ, outside the submitted 
work. FN reports grants from GSK, outside the submitted work. HH has nothing to 
disclose. LM reports grants from Wellcome, grants from MRC, grants from NIHR, 
grants from GSK, grants from BHF, grants from Diabetes UK, outside the submitted 
work and is a Trustee of the British Heart Foundation. SD has nothing to 
disclose. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S 
NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


114. J Chin Med Assoc. 2019 Jun;82(6):488-494. doi: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000000114.

Long-acting muscarinic antagonist versus long-acting β2 agonist/corticosteroid 
for moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients: 
Exacerbation risk assessment.

Yang SN(1)(2), Ko HK(3)(4), Hsiao YH(3)(4), Su KC(3)(4), Chang YL(1)(5), Huang 
HY(6)(7), Perng DW(3)(4), Chung MI(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 
ROC.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.
(3)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan, ROC.
(4)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(5)Department and Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(6)College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(7)Biostatistics Task Force, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 
ROC.

BACKGROUND: Whether the beneficial effects of long-acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMA) are better than those of long-acting β2 agonist/corticosteroids 
(LABA/ICS) in preventing exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) remains unclear. This study aimed to assess the risk of exacerbations in 
moderate to severe COPD patients receiving LAMA versus LABA/ICS.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of patients diagnosed 
with COPD (2008-2010). The inclusion criteria were age ≥ 40 years, forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 30% to 80% of predicted value and at least 
three prescriptions for COPD medication, including LAMA or LABA/ICS.
RESULTS: Of the 557 COPD patients screened, 90 patients were enrolled in the 
analysis. The demographic characteristics of patients receiving LABA/ICS or LAMA 
were similar. The all exacerbation rates was significantly higher in patients 
with global initiative for chronic obstructive lung disease stage II COPD 
treated with LABA/ICS than in those treated with LAMA (p = 0.001), regardless of 
previous exacerbation history. Patients with previous exacerbation history 
showed an independent increase in the risk of moderate or severe exacerbation 
compared with those without exacerbation history (hazard ratio 3.86, 95% CI 
1.75-8.53, p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: In comparison with LABA/ICS, LAMA is beneficial in reducing 
exacerbation risk for moderate COPD. Previous exacerbation history independently 
predicts the future risk of exacerbation regardless of treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000000114
PMID: 31180947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Immunol. 2019 Jan 1;202(1):160-170. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800547. Epub 2018 
Nov 30.

Rhinovirus and Bacteria Synergistically Induce IL-17C Release from Human Airway 
Epithelial Cells To Promote Neutrophil Recruitment.

Jamieson KC(1), Traves SL(1), Kooi C(1)(2), Wiehler S(1), Dumonceaux CJ(1)(2), 
Maciejewski BA(1), Arnason JW(1)(2), Michi AN(1), Leigh R(1)(2), Proud D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Snyder Institute for Chronic 
Diseases, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta 
T2N 4Z6, Canada; and.
(2)Department of Medicine, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, Cumming School 
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4Z6, Canada.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Snyder Institute for Chronic 
Diseases, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta 
T2N 4Z6, Canada; and dproud@ucalgary.ca.

Virus-bacteria coinfections are associated with more severe exacerbations and 
increased risk of hospital readmission in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). The airway epithelium responds to such infections by 
releasing proinflammatory and antimicrobial cytokines, including IL-17C. 
However, the regulation and role of IL-17C is not well understood. In this 
study, we examine the mechanisms regulating IL-17C production and its potential 
role in COPD exacerbations. Human bronchial epithelial cells (HBE) obtained from 
normal, nontransplanted lungs or from brushings of nonsmokers, healthy smokers, 
or COPD patients were exposed to bacteria and/or human rhinovirus (HRV). RNA and 
protein were collected for analysis, and signaling pathways were assessed with 
pharmacological agonists, inhibitors, or small interfering RNAs. HBE were also 
stimulated with IL-17C to assess function. HRV-bacterial coinfections 
synergistically induced IL-17C expression. This induction was dependent on HRV 
replication and required NF-κB-mediated signaling. Synergy was lost in the 
presence of an inhibitor of the p38 MAP kinase pathway. HBE exposed to IL-17C 
show increased gene expression of CXCL1, CXCL2, NFKBIZ, and TFRC, and release 
CXCL1 protein, a neutrophil chemoattractant. Knockdown of IL-17C significantly 
reduced induction of CXCL1 in response to HRV-bacterial coinfection as well as 
neutrophil chemotaxis. HBE from healthy smokers release less IL-17C than cells 
from nonsmokers, but cells from COPD patients release significantly more IL-17C 
compared with either nonsmokers or healthy smokers. These data suggest that 
IL-17C may contribute to microbial-induced COPD exacerbations by promoting 
neutrophil recruitment.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800547
PMID: 30504421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Clin Respir J. 2019 Jun;13(6):391-399. doi: 10.1111/crj.13024. Epub 2019 May 8.

Carotid intima-media thickness in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 
survival: A multicenter prospective study.

Gulbas G(1), Turan O(2), Sarioglu N(3), Diken OE(4), Ogan N(5), Ekbic Kadioglu 
E(6), Kurtipek E(7), Bozkus F(8), Yilmaz Demirci N(9), Coskun Beyan A(10), Mutlu 
LC(11), Sahin Duyar S(12), Deniz S(13), Fazlioglu N(14), Sengul A(15), 
Tanriverdi H(16), Okutan O(17), Turan PA(18), İnonu H(19), Ortakoylu MG(20), 
Lakadamyali H(21), Kivanc T(22), Atli O(23), Özdemir O(24), Filiz Koşar A(25), 
Mirici A(26), Suerdem M(27).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Turgut Ozal Research Center, Inonu 
University, Malatya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training 
and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Balikesir University, Balikesir, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hitit University, Corum, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Ufuk University, Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erzurum Training and Research Hospital, 
Erzurum, Turkey.
(7)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Konya Training and Research Hospital, 
Konya, Turkey.
(8)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Sutcu Imam University, K. Maras, Turkey.
(9)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey.
(10)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey.
(11)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Namik Kemal University, Tekirdag, Turkey.
(12)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Beypazari State Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(13)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Didim State Hospital, Mugla, Turkey.
(14)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Acibadem Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey.
(15)Derince Training and Research Hospital, Kocaeli, Turkey.
(16)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Bulent Ecevit University, Zonguldak, 
Turkey.
(17)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, GATA, Training and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul.
(18)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Menemen State Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(19)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Gazi Osman Pasa University, Tokat, Turkey.
(20)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Yedikule Training and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(21)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Baskent University, Alanya, Turkey.
(22)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Baskent University, Konya, Turkey.
(23)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Diyarbakir State Hospital, Diyarbakir, 
Turkey.
(24)Egepol Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(25)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Saglik Bilimleri University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(26)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, 18 Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey.
(27)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with 
increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Carotid intima-media thickness 
(CIMT) is a noninvasive method assessing atherosclerosis.
OBJECTIVE: It was aimed to determine relationship and survival between COPD and 
CIMT.
METHODS: CIMT was measured using Doppler ultrasound (USG) in 668 stable COPD 
patients at 24 centers. Patients were followed-up for 2 years.
RESULTS: There were 610 patients who completed the study. There were 200 
patients CIMT with <0.78 mm (group 1), and 410 with CIMT ≥ 0.78 mm (group 2). 
There was a significant difference at the parameters of age, gender, smoking 
load, biomass exposure, GOLD groups and degree of airway obstruction (FEV1) 
between groups 1 and 2. Our results revealed positive correlations between mean 
CIMT and age, smoking load (pack-years), biomass exposure (years), exacerbation 
rate (last year), duration of hypertension (years) and cholesterol level; 
negative correlations between CIMT and FEV1 (P < 0.05). According to logistic 
regression model, compared with group A, risk of CIMT increase was 2.2-fold in 
group B, 9.7-fold in group C and 4.4-fold in group D (P < 0.05). Risk of CIMT 
increase was also related with cholesterol level (P < 0.05). Compared with 
infrequent exacerbation, it was 2.8-fold in the patients with frequent 
exacerbation (P < 0.05). The mean survival time was slightly higher in group 1, 
but not significant (23.9 vs 21.8 months) (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: This study is the first regarding CIMT with combined GOLD assessment 
groups. It has revealed important findings supporting the increase in 
atherosclerosis risk in COPD patients. We recommend Doppler USG of the carotid 
artery in COPD patients at severe stages.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13024
PMID: 30942958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mutat Res. 2019 Jul;843:111-117. doi: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2019.04.003. Epub 2019 
Apr 12.

Biomarkers of DNA damage in COPD patients undergoing pulmonary rehabilitation: 
Integrating clinical parameters with genomic profiling.

Russo P(1), Lamonaca P(1), Milic M(2), Rojas E(3), Prinzi G(1), Cardaci V(4), 
Vitiello L(5), Proietti S(6), Santoro A(1), Tomino C(6), Fini M(6), Bonassi 
S(7).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Roma, 
Italy.
(2)Institute for Medical Research and Occupational Health, Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Departamento de Medicina Genòmica y Toxicologìa Ambiental, Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autònoma de México, Ciudad 
Universitaria, Mexico.
(4)Unit of Pulmonary Rehabilitation, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy.
(5)Unit of Flow Cytometry IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy.
(6)Scientific Direction, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy.
(7)Unit of Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Roma, 
Italy; Department of Human Sciences and Quality of Life Promotion, San Raffaele 
University, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: stefano.bonassi@sanraffaele.it.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive lung disease 
characterized by severe respiratory symptoms. COPD shows several hallmarks of 
aging, and an increased oxidative stress, which is responsible for different 
clinical and molecular COPD features, including an increased frequency of DNA 
damage. The current pharmacological treatment options for COPD are mostly 
symptomatic, and generally do not influence disease progression and survival. In 
this framework, pulmonary rehabilitation is the most effective therapeutic 
strategy to improve physical performance, reducing hospital readmissions and 
mortality. Response to rehabilitation may greatly differ among patients calling 
for a personalized treatment. In this paper we will investigate in a group of 
COPD patients those variables that may predict the response to a program of 
pulmonary rehabilitation, integrating clinical parameters with cellular and 
molecular measurements, offering the potential for more effective and 
individualized treatment options. A group of 89 consecutive COPD patients 
admitted to a 3-weeks Pulmonary Rehabilitation (PR) program were evaluated for 
clinical and biological parameters at baseline and after completion of PR. DNA 
fragmentation in cryopreserved lymphocytes was compared by visual scoring and 
using the Comet Assay IV analysis system. The comparison of DNA damage before 
and after PR showed a highly significant increase from 19.6 ± 7.3 at admission 
to 21.8 ± 7.2 after three weeks of treatment, with a significant increase of 
2.46 points (p < 0.001). Higher levels of DNA damage were observed in the group 
of non- responders and in those patients receiving oxygen therapy. The overall 
variation of %TI during treatment significantly correlated with the level of 
pCO2 at admission and negatively with the level of IL-6 at admission. Measuring 
the frequency of DNA damage in COPD patients undergoing pulmonary rehabilitation 
may provide a meaningful biological marker of response and should be considered 
as additional diagnostic and prognostic criterion for personalized 
rehabilitation programs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2019.04.003
PMID: 31421732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Biomolecules. 2019 Feb 13;9(2):62. doi: 10.3390/biom9020062.

Relationship Between Circulating Serpina3g, Matrix Metalloproteinase-9, and 
Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase-1 and -2 with Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease Severity.

Uysal P(1), Uzun H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, School of Medicine, Acibadem Mehmet Ali 
Aydinlar University, Atakent Hospital, Istanbul 34303, Turkey. 
pelin.uysal@acibadem.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul 
University-Cerrahpasa, Istanbul 34098, Turkey. uzun@istanbul.edu.tr.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is influenced by genetic and 
environmental factors. A protease-antiprotease imbalance has been suggested as a 
possible pathogenic mechanism for COPD. Here, we examined the relationship 
between circulating serpina3g, matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), and tissue 
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 and -2 (TIMP-1 and -2, respectively) and 
severity of COPD. We included 150 stable COPD patients and 35 control subjects 
in the study. The COPD patients were classified into four groups (I, II, III, 
and IV), according to the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) guidelines based on the severity of symptoms and the exacerbation risk. 
Plasma serpina3g, MMP-9, and TIMP-1 and -2 concentrations were significantly 
higher in the all patients than in control subjects. Plasma serpina3g, MMP-9, 
and TIMP-1 and -2 concentrations were significantly higher in groups III and IV 
than in groups I and II. A negative correlation between serpina3g, MMP-9, and 
TIMP-1 and -2 levels and the forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) was 
observed. MMP-9 concentration and the MMP-9/TIMP-1 ratio were higher in patients 
with emphysema than in other phenotypes (both with p < 0.01). The findings of 
this study suggest that circulating serpina3g, MMP-9, and TIMP-1 and -2 levels 
may play an important role in airway remodeling in COPD pathogenesis. Disrupted 
protease-antiprotease imbalance in patients with COPD is related to the presence 
of airway injury. MMP-9 concentration and the MMP-9/TIMP-1 ratio are the best 
predictors of emphysema in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.3390/biom9020062
PMCID: PMC6406460
PMID: 30781876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest related to the publication of this manuscript.


119. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2019 Feb 1;316(2):L369-L384. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00456.2018. Epub 2018 Dec 6.

Oxidative stress and macrophages: driving forces behind exacerbations of asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?

de Groot LES(1)(2), van der Veen TA(3)(4), Martinez FO(5), Hamann J(2), Lutter 
R(1)(2), Melgert BN(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam , 
Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Experimental Immunology, Amsterdam Infection and Immunity 
Institute, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pharmacokinetics, Toxicology, and Targeting, Groningen Research 
Institute for Pharmacy, University of Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands.
(4)Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen , 
Groningen , The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Biochemical Sciences, University of Surrey , Guildford , United 
Kingdom.

Oxidative stress is a common feature of obstructive airway diseases like asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Lung macrophages are key 
innate immune cells that can generate oxidants and are known to display aberrant 
polarization patterns and defective phagocytic responses in these diseases. 
Whether these characteristics are linked in one way or another and whether they 
contribute to the onset and severity of exacerbations in asthma and COPD remain 
poorly understood. Insight into oxidative stress, macrophages, and their 
interactions may be important in fully understanding acute worsening of lung 
disease. This review therefore highlights the current state of the art regarding 
the role of oxidative stress and macrophages in exacerbations of asthma and 
COPD. It shows that oxidative stress can attenuate macrophage function, which 
may result in impaired responses toward exacerbating triggers and may contribute 
to exaggerated inflammation in the airways.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00456.2018
PMID: 30520687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2019 Mar;25(2):150-157. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000548.

Procalcitonin and antibiotics in moderate-severe acute exacerbation of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: to use or not to use.

Chan HP(1)(2), Lim TK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, University Medicine 
Cluster, National University Health System.
(2)Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading 
cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD) 
are major driver for healthcare utilization with each exacerbation begetting the 
next exacerbation. It is, therefore, important to treat each episode effectively 
to prevent the next. However, this can be challenging as AECOPD result from 
complex interactions between host, environment and infective agents. The 
benefits of starting antibiotics in AECOPD, which are not life-threatening (e.g. 
not requiring mechanical ventilation) or not complicated by pneumonia remain 
controversial.
RECENT FINDINGS: The use of procalcitonin to guide antibiotic therapy in AECOPD 
has gained interest in recent years. The main advantage of this approach is a 
safe reduction in antibiotic use in a large group of patients, which may 
potentially translate to several other benefits. These include reduced 
antibiotic-related side-effects, reduced risk of developing antibiotic-resistant 
organisms and cost savings. This approach is associated with no increase in 
mortality or morbidity such as treatment failure, re-admission, admission to 
ICU.
SUMMARY: Procalcitonin-guided antibiotic therapy in AECOPD is a promising and 
safe approach, which may be ready for the prime time.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000548
PMID: 30418243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Respir Med. 2019 Apr;150:141-148. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.03.007. Epub 2019 Mar 
21.

Determinants of CAT (COPD Assessment Test) scores in a population of patients 
with COPD in central and Eastern Europe: The POPE study.

Miravitlles M(1), Koblizek V(2), Esquinas C(3), Milenkovic B(4), Barczyk A(5), 
Tkacova R(6), Somfay A(7), Zykov K(8), Tudoric N(9), Kostov K(10), Zbozinkova 
Z(11), Svoboda M(11), Sorli J(12), Krams A(13), Valipour A(14).

Author information:
(1)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron/Vall d'Hebron 
Research Institute (VHIR), CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 
Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: mmiravitlles@vhebron.net.
(2)Department of Pneumology, University Hospital Hradec Králové, Charles 
University, Faculty of Medicine in Hradec Králové, Czech Republic.
(3)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron/Vall d'Hebron 
Research Institute (VHIR), CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Clinic for Pulmonary Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Center of 
Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Department of Pneumology, School of Medicine in Katowice, Medical University 
of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Tuberculosis, Faculty of Medicine, 
P.J. Safarik University, Kosice, Slovakia.
(7)Department of Pulmonology, University of Szeged, Deszk, Hungary.
(8)Pulmonology Scientific Research Institute under FMBA of Russia, Moscow State 
University of Medicine and Dentistry Named after A.I.Evdokimov, Russia.
(9)School of Medicine Zagreb, University Hospital Dubrava, Zagreb, Croatia.
(10)Clinic of Pulmonary Diseases, Military Medical Academy, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(11)Institute of Biostatistics and Analyses, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk 
University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(12)Pulmonary Department, Topolsica Hospital, Topolsica, Slovenia.
(13)Faculty of Medicine, University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia; Riga East 
University Hospital, Latvia.
(14)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 
Ludwig-Boltzmann-Institute for COPD and Respiratory Epidemiology, 
Otto-Wagner-Spital, Wien, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The COPD Assessment Test (CAT) has been proposed to help guide 
therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is important to 
understand the distribution of scores in different COPD populations and their 
determinants.
METHODS: The POPE study is an international, observational cross-sectional study 
of COPD subjects in 11 Central and Eastern European countries aimed at 
characterizing COPD phenotypes. Here we report the analysis of CAT scores with 
the objective of identifying their determinants, evaluating symptom load and 
investigating the distribution of scores among the participating countries. 
Additionally, we investigated the discrepancies between the CAT and modified 
Medical Research Council (mMRC) scores when used to classify patients according 
to the GOLD strategy.
RESULTS: The study included 3452 patients (69.2% men, mean forced expiratory 
volume in 1 s (FEV1% predicted) 52.5%). The mean CAT score was 17.5 (SD = 7.8), 
ranging from 15.1 in Hungary to 21.2 in Bulgaria. Multiple linear regression 
analysis showed six variables significantly associated with CAT scores: 
depression, number of previous exacerbations, 6-min walking distance, FEV1(%), 
mMRC and country and explained 47.2% of the variance of CAT. According to either 
CAT or mMRC, up to 23.9% patients would be classified in different GOLD groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The CAT score may be predicted by factors related to COPD severity, 
depression and exercise capacity, with significant differences in the 
distribution of CAT scores in different countries. According to our results CAT 
>10 is not equivalent to mMRC >2 for assessing symptom burden.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT02119494.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.03.007
PMID: 30961941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2019 Dec 30;17(1):189. doi: 
10.1186/s12955-019-1244-4.

Health-related quality of life of patients diagnosed with COPD in Extremadura, 
Spain: results from an observational study.

Merino M(1), Villoro R(2), Hidalgo-Vega Á(2)(3), Carmona C(4); Collaborative 
Working Group EPOC-Extremadura.

Collaborators: Alonso García de Vinuesa S, Bejarano Cebrián A, Beorlegui Aristu 
G, Domínguez Rodríguez JC, Fernández Prieto L, Galán Parra MC, García Martínez 
AM, García-Adámez Soto RM, Guío Carretero MM, Horrillo Murillo L, Laso Martínez 
MT, Martín Jurado L, Martín de la Nava MA, Martínez Domínguez ME, Morillo 
Pantoja C, Ortiz Rodríguez O, Pardo Amaya M, Villalba Doblas AM.

Author information:
(1)Fundación Weber, Calle Moreto 17, 5 D, 28014, Madrid, Spain. 
maria.merino@weber.org.es.
(2)Fundación Weber, Calle Moreto 17, 5 D, 28014, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Cobertizo de San Pedro Mártir s/n, 45071, 
Toledo, Spain.
(4)Servicio Extremeño de Salud, Avenida de las Américas 2, 06800 Mérida, 
Badajoz, Spain.

BACKGROUND: COPD is a high prevalence chronic disease that involves large 
reductions of health-related quality of life (HRQL) of patients. This study aims 
to describe the HRQL of patients with COPD in Extremadura (Spain).
METHODS: This is a cross-sectional observational study carried out using a 
representative sample of patients diagnosed with COPD in Extremadura. The 
inclusion criteria were patients of legal age, diagnosed with COPD at least 
12 months prior to the visit, residing in Extremadura, with electronic medical 
records available for the 12 months prior to the visit and providing informed 
consent. The intervention aimed to elicit HRQL indicators obtained from two 
validated questionnaires: EuroQol - 5 Dimensions - 5 Levels (EQ-5D-5L), and St. 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire-COPD (SGRQ-C). The main outcome measures were 
general HRQL (utility and visual analogue scale) and specific quality of life of 
COPD patients (total score and three component scores: Symptoms, Activity, and 
Impacts). Stepwise multiple regression analysis was applied to evaluate the 
association of EQ-5D-5L and SGRQ-C with respect to clinical and sociodemographic 
characteristics of the patients.
RESULTS: We recruited 386 patients (mean age 71.8 ± 10.3 years, 76.2% males). In 
the EQ-5D-5L, participants reported greater problems with respect to mobility 
(56.5%) and pain/discomfort (48.2%). The mean utility was 0.72 ± 0.31, and the 
SGRQ-C total score was 40.9 ± 25.0. The results of both questionnaires were 
associated with number of exacerbations in the last 12 months, level of COPD 
severity, gender, and education level of the patient (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The results for both utility and total SGRQ-C score indicate that 
having suffered exacerbations in the last year, presenting a higher level of 
severity, being a woman, and having a low education level are related to worse 
HRQL in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12955-019-1244-4
PMCID: PMC6937847
PMID: 31888646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


123. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2019 Mar;29(3):249-252. doi: 
10.29271/jcpsp.2019.03.249.

Inhaled Glucocorticoid with or without Tiotropium Bromide for Asthma-Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Overlap Syndrome.

Xu H(1), Lu X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Wuwei People's Hospital, North of Xuanwu 
Street, Xincheng District, Wuwei City, Gansu Province, 733000, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Digestive, Wuwei People's Hospital, North of Xuanwu 
Street, Xincheng District, Wuwei City, Gansu Province, 733000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy of inhaled glucocorticoid with or without 
tiotropium bromide in the treatment of patients with asthma-chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease overlap syndrome (ACOS).
STUDY DESIGN: An experimental study.
PLACE AND DURATION OF STUDY: Department of Respiratory Medicine, Wuwei People's 
Hospital, Gansu Province, China, from October 2016 to October 2017.
METHODOLOGY: A total of 86 ACOS patients were randomly divided into the control 
group and the observation group, with 43 cases in each group. Control group was 
given inhaled glucocorticoid. Observation group was treated with tiotropium 
bromide on the basis of the control group. The asthma control test (ACT) score, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease assessment test (CAT) score, serum 
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) and IL-6 levels were compared.
RESULTS: Before treatment, there was no significant difference in ACT score, CAT 
score, serum hs-CRP and IL-6 levels between the two groups (p=0.808, 0.612, 
0.872 and 0.921, respectively). After treatment, ACT score in observation group 
was higher than that in control group (p <0.001). CAT score, serum hs-CRP, and 
IL-6 levels in observation group were lower than those in control group (all p 
<0.001). The incidence of adverse reactions was lower in observation group than 
that in control group (p=0.033).
CONCLUSION: Compared with inhaled glucocorticoid, inhaled glucocorticoid 
combined with tiotropium bromide treatment can more effectively reduce the serum 
levels of hs-CRP and IL-6 and is beneficial to control the development of ACOS.

DOI: 10.29271/jcpsp.2019.03.249
PMID: 30823952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Jun 9;15:1301-1313. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S224209. eCollection 2020.

Critical Error Frequency and the Impact of Training with Inhalers Commonly used 
for Maintenance Treatment in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Collier DJ(1)(2), Wielders P(3), van der Palen J(4)(5), Heyes L(6), Midwinter 
D(6), Collison K(7), Preece A(6), Barnes N(1)(6), Sharma R(6).

Author information:
(1)William Harvey Research Institute, Barts & The London School of Medicine & 
Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(2)Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Barts & The London School of 
Medicine & Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pulmonology, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Research Methodology, Measurement, and Data Analysis, 
University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands.
(6)Respiratory Therapy Area Unit, GlaxoSmithKline Plc., Stockley Park, Uxbridge, 
UK.
(7)Respiratory Medical Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline Plc., Research Triangle Park, 
Durham, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Training in correct inhaler use, ideally in person or by video 
demonstration, can minimize errors but is rarely provided in clinics. This 
open-label, low-intervention study evaluated critical error rates with 
dry-powder inhalers (DPIs), before and after training, in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: Patients prescribed an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting 
β2-agonist (LABA) (ELLIPTA, Turbuhaler, or DISKUS), long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA)/LABA (ELLIPTA or Breezhaler), or LAMA-only DPI (ELLIPTA, 
HandiHaler, or Breezhaler) were enrolled. Critical errors were assessed before 
training (Visit 1 [V1]; primary endpoint) and 6 weeks thereafter (Visit 2 [V2]; 
secondary endpoint). Logistic regression models were used to calculate odds 
ratios (ORs) for between-group comparisons.
RESULTS: The intent-to-treat population comprised 450 patients. At V1, fewer 
patients made ≥1 critical error with ELLIPTA (10%) versus other ICS/LABA DPIs 
(Turbuhaler: 40%, OR 4.66, P=0.005; DISKUS: 26%, OR 2.48, P=0.114) and other 
LAMA or LAMA/LABA DPIs (HandiHaler: 34%, OR 3.50, P=0.026; Breezhaler: 33%, OR 
3.94, P=0.012). Critical error rates with the primary ICS/LABA DPI were not 
significantly different between ELLIPTA ICS/LABA (10%) and ICS/LABA plus LAMA 
groups (12-25%). Critical errors with the primary ICS/LABA DPI occurred less 
frequently with ELLIPTA ICS/LABA with or without LAMA (11%) versus Turbuhaler 
ICS/LABA with or without LAMA (39%, OR 3.99, P<0.001) and DISKUS ICS/LABA with 
or without LAMA (26%, OR 2.18, P=0.069). Simulating single-inhaler versus 
multiple-inhaler triple therapy, critical error rates were lower with ELLIPTA 
fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI; 10%) versus ELLIPTA FF/VI plus LAMA 
(22%), considering errors with either DPI (OR 2.50, P=0.108). At V2, critical 
error rates decreased for all DPIs/groups, reaching zero only for ELLIPTA. 
Between-group comparisons were similar to V1.
CONCLUSION: Fewer patients made critical errors with ELLIPTA versus other 
ICS/LABA, and LAMA or LAMA/LABA DPIs. The effect of "verbal" training highlights 
its importance for reducing critical errors with common DPIs.

© 2020 Collier et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S224209
PMCID: PMC7294437
PMID: 32606640

Conflict of interest statement: David J Collier was supported in part by the 
NIHR Barts Biomedical Research Centre. Job van der Palen reports personal fees 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, and GlaxoSmithKline plc., and grants 
from Chiesi, outside the submitted work. Logan Heyes was an employee of 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. at the time of the study, and is currently employed by 
Pharmaceutical Management Agency (PHARMAC). Dawn Midwinter, Kathryn Collison, 
Andy Preece, Neil Barnes, and Raj Sharma are employees of, and have shares in, 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


125. Phys Ther. 2019 Sep 1;99(9):1255-1267. doi: 10.1093/ptj/pzz059.

Fixed Handheld Dynamometry Provides Reliable and Valid Values for Quadriceps 
Isometric Strength in People With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A 
Multicenter Study.

Bui KL(1), Mathur S(2), Dechman G(3), Maltais F(4), Camp P(5), Saey D(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche, Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie 
de Québec, Université Laval, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)School of Physiotherapy, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(4)Centre de Recherche, Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie 
de Québec, Université Laval.
(5)Centre for Heart and Lung Innovation, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; and Department of Physical Therapy, 
University of British Columbia.
(6)Centre de Recherche, Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie 
de Québec, Université Laval, 2725 Chemin Ste-Foy, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada, 
G1V 4G5.

BACKGROUND: Quadriceps weakness is associated with poor clinical outcomes in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, quadriceps isometric 
strength assessment has not been routinely adopted in clinical practice because 
of the lack of homogeneity in the devices and protocols and the lack of 
reliability studies.
OBJECTIVE: The objectives of this study were to determine the test-retest 
reliability and the criterion validity of a commercially available handheld 
dynamometer for evaluating the quadriceps isometric maximal voluntary 
contraction (iMVCquad) using a standardized protocol and to investigate the 
relationship between iMVCquad and functional capacity in people with COPD.
DESIGN: This was a prospective, observational, multicenter trial.
METHODS: Participants with mild to severe COPD from 4 Canadian sites were tested 
on 2 separate days. Five iMVCquad measurements were obtained following a 
standardized procedure with a fixed handheld dynamometer (iMVCquad-HHD), and 
then 5 iMVCquad measurements were obtained with a computerized dynamometer 
(iMVCquad-CD; the gold standard). Functional capacity was assessed with the 
Short Physical Performance Battery. Intraclass correlation coefficients, 
standard errors of measurement, Bland-Altman plots, and Spearman correlation 
coefficients were used for analyses.
RESULTS: Sixty-five participants (mean age = 69 years [SD = 8]; forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second = 48% of predicted value [SD = 21]) completed the 
study. The mean iMVCquad-HHD values on visits 1 and 2 were 102.7 (SD = 51.6) and 
105.6 (SD = 58.8) N·m, respectively; the standard error of measurement was 11.4 
N·m. The between-visits intraclass correlation coefficient for iMVCquad-HHD was 
0.95 (95% confidence interval  = 0.92-0.97), with a mean bias of 2.0 
(Bland-Altman plot). There was a strong correlation between iMVCquad-HHD and 
iMVCquad-CD (Spearman correlation coefficient = 0.86). There was no correlation 
between iMVCquad-HHD and Short Physical Performance Battery total score.
LIMITATIONS: Participants had stable COPD with few comorbidities and were more 
physically active than the general population of people with COPD; results might 
not be applicable to patients with acute exacerbations of the disease or more 
comorbidities. Assessment order between handheld and computerized dynamometers 
has not been randomized, but analyses did not highlight any systematic bias or 
learning effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Quadriceps strength assessment can be implemented in a reliable and 
valid way in people with COPD using a fixed handheld dynamometer and 
standardized procedure. This protocol should be established in clinical practice 
to facilitate the assessment of muscle strength in people with COPD.

© 2019 American Physical Therapy Association.

DOI: 10.1093/ptj/pzz059
PMID: 30939198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 Jul;16(7):826-835. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201809-601OC.

Combined Forced Expiratory Volume in 1 Second and Forced Vital Capacity 
Bronchodilator Response, Exacerbations, and Mortality in Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease.

Fortis S(1)(2), Comellas A(1), Make BJ(3), Hersh CP(4)(5), Bodduluri S(6), 
Georgopoulos D(2)(7)(8), Kim V(9), Criner GJ(9), Dransfield MT(6)(10), Bhatt 
SP(6); COPDGene Investigators–Core Units: <italic>Administrative 
Center</italic>, COPDGene Investigators–Clinical Centers: <italic>Ann Arbor 
VA</italic>.

Collaborators: Crapo JD, Silverman EK, Make BJ, Regan EA, Beaty T, Begum F, 
Busch R, Castaldi PJ, Cho M, DeMeo DL, Boueiz AR, Foreman MG, Halper-Stromberg 
E, Hansel NN, Hardin ME, Hayden LP, Hersh CP, Hetmanski J, Hobbs BD, Hokanson 
JE, Laird N, Lange C, Lutz SM, McDonald ML, Parker MM, Qiao D, Regan EA, 
Santorico S, Silverman EK, Wan ES, Won S, Al Qaisi M, Coxson HO, Gray T, Han MK, 
Hoffman EA, Humphries S, Jacobson FL, Judy PF, Kazerooni EA, Kluiber A, Lynch 
DA, Newell JD Jr, Regan EA, Ross JC, San Jose Estepar R, Schroeder J, Sieren J, 
Stinson D, Stoel BC, Tschirren J, Van Beek E, van Ginneken B, van Rikxoort E, 
Washko G, Wilson CG, Jensen R, Everett D, Crooks J, Moore C, Strand M, Wilson 
CG, Hokanson JE, Hughes J, Kinney G, Lutz SM, Pratte K, Young KA, Curtis JL, 
Martinez CH, Pernicano PG, Hanania N, Alapat P, Atik M, Bandi V, Boriek A, 
Guntupalli K, Guy E, Nachiappan A, Parulekar A, DeMeo DL, Hersh C, Jacobson FL, 
Washko G, Barr RG, Austin J, D'Souza B, Pearson GDN, Rozenshtein A, Thomashow B, 
MacIntyre N Jr, McAdams HP, Washington L, McEvoy C, Tashjian J, Wise R, Brown R, 
Hansel NN, Horton K, Lambert A, Putcha N, Casaburi R, Adami A, Budoff M, Fischer 
H, Porszasz J, Rossiter H, Stringer W, Sharafkhaneh A, Lan C, Wendt C, Bell B, 
Foreman MG, Berkowitz E, Westney G, Bowler R, Lynch DA, Rosiello R, Pace D, 
Criner G, Ciccolella D, Cordova F, Dass C, D'Alonzo G, Desai P, Jacobs M, Kelsen 
S, Kim V, Mamary AJ, Marchetti N, Satti A, Shenoy K, Steiner RM, Swift A, Swift 
I, Vega-Sanchez ME, Dransfield M, Bailey W, Bhatt S, Iyer A, Nath H, Wells JM, 
Ramsdell J, Friedman P, Soler X, Yen A, Comellas AP, Newell J Jr, Thompson B, 
Han MK, Kazerooni E, Martinez CH, Billings J, Begnaud A, Allen T, Sciurba F, Bon 
J, Chandra D, Fuhrman C, Weissfeld J, Anzueto A, Adams S, Maselli-Caceres D, 
Ruiz ME.

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Occupational Medicine, University 
of Iowa Hospital and Clinics, Iowa City, Iowa.
(2)2 Medical School.
(3)3 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, National Jewish 
Health, Denver, Colorado.
(4)4 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and.
(5)5 Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)6 UAB Lung Imaging Core, Lung Health Center, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy 
and Critical Care Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama.
(7)7 Department of Pulmonary Medicine, and.
(8)8 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University Hospital of Heraklion, 
Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(9)9 Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Lewis Katz School of Medicine 
at Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and.
(10)10 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Birmingham VA Medical 
Center, Birmingham, Alabama.

Rationale: The American Thoracic Society (ATS)/European Respiratory Society 
defines a positive bronchodilator response (BDR) by a composite of BDR in either 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and/or forced vital capacity (FVC) 
greater than or equal to 12% and 200 ml (ATS-BDR). We hypothesized that ATS-BDR 
components would be differentially associated with important chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) outcomes. Objectives: To examine whether ATS-BDR 
components are differentially associated with clinical, functional, and 
radiographic features in COPD. Methods: We included subjects with COPD enrolled 
in the COPDGene study. In the main analysis, we excluded subjects with 
self-reported asthma. We categorized BDR into the following: 1) No-BDR, no BDR 
in either FEV1 or FVC; 2) FEV1-BDR, BDR in FEV1 but no BDR in FVC; 3) FVC-BDR, 
BDR in FVC but no BDR in FEV1; and 4) Combined-BDR, BDR in both FEV1 and FVC. We 
constructed multivariable logistic, linear, zero-inflated negative binomial, and 
Cox hazards models to examine the association of BDR categories with symptoms, 
computed tomography findings, change in FEV1 over time, respiratory 
exacerbations, and mortality. We also created models using the ATS BDR 
definition (ATS-BDR) as the main independent variable. Results: Of 3,340 COPD 
subjects included in the analysis, 1,083 (32.43%) had ATS-BDR, 182 (5.45%) had 
FEV1-BDR, 522 (15.63%) had FVC-BDR, and 379 (11.34%) had Combined-BDR. All BDR 
categories were associated with FEV1 decline compared with No-BDR. Compared with 
No-BDR, both ATS-BDR and Combined-BDR were associated with higher functional 
residual capacity %predicted, greater internal perimeter of 10 mm, and greater 
6-minute-walk distance. In contrast to ATS-BDR, Combined-BDR was independently 
associated with less emphysema (adjusted beta regression coefficient, -1.67; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], -2.68 to -0.65; P = 0.001), more frequent respiratory 
exacerbations (incidence rate ratio, 1.25; 95% CI, 1.03-1.50; P = 0.02) and 
severe exacerbations (incidence rate ratio, 1.34; 95% CI, 1.05-1.71; P = 0.02), 
and lower mortality (adjusted hazards ratio, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.58-0.99; 
P = 0.046). Sensitivity analysis that included subjects with self-reported 
history of asthma showed similar findings. Conclusions: BDR in both FEV1 and FVC 
indicates a COPD phenotype with asthma-like characteristics, and provides 
clinically more meaningful information than current definitions of BDR.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201809-601OC
PMCID: PMC6600841
PMID: 30908927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. BMC Med. 2019 Apr 5;17(1):73. doi: 10.1186/s12916-019-1310-0.

Predicting COPD 1-year mortality using prognostic predictors routinely measured 
in primary care.

Bloom CI(1), Ricciardi F(2), Smeeth L(3), Stone P(4), Quint JK(5).

Author information:
(1)National Heart Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Emmanuel Kaye 
Building, 1b Manresa Road, London, SW3 6LR, UK. chloe.bloom06@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Statistical Science, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, LSHTM, Keppel Street, London, WC1E 7HT, UK.
(4)Marie Curie Palliative Care Research Department, University College London, 
London, UK.
(5)Department of Respiratory Epidemiology, Occupational Medicine and Public 
Health, NHLI, Imperial College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of 
mortality. Patients with advanced disease often have a poor quality of life, 
such that guidelines recommend providing palliative care in their last year of 
life. Uptake and use of palliative care in advanced COPD is low; difficulty in 
predicting 1-year mortality is thought to be a major contributing factor.
METHODS: We identified two primary care COPD cohorts using UK electronic 
healthcare records (Clinical Practice Research Datalink). The first cohort was 
randomised equally into training and test sets. An external dataset was drawn 
from a second cohort. A risk model to predict mortality within 12 months was 
derived from the training set using backwards elimination Cox regression. The 
model was given the acronym BARC based on putative prognostic factors including 
body mass index and blood results (B), age (A), respiratory variables (airflow 
obstruction, exacerbations, smoking) (R) and comorbidities (C). The BARC index 
predictive performance was validated in the test set and external dataset by 
assessing calibration and discrimination. The observed and expected 
probabilities of death were assessed for increasing quartiles of mortality risk 
(very low risk, low risk, moderate risk, high risk). The BARC index was compared 
to the established index scores body mass index, obstructive, dyspnoea and 
exacerbations (BODEx), dyspnoea, obstruction, smoking and exacerbations (DOSE) 
and age, dyspnoea and obstruction (ADO).
RESULTS: Fifty-four thousand nine hundred ninety patients were eligible from the 
first cohort and 4931 from the second cohort. Eighteen variables were included 
in the BARC, including age, airflow obstruction, body mass index, smoking, 
exacerbations and comorbidities. The risk model had acceptable predictive 
performance (test set: C-index = 0.79, 95% CI 0.78-0.81, D-statistic = 1.87, 95% 
CI 1.77-1.96, calibration slope = 0.95, 95% CI 0.9-0.99; external dataset: 
C-index = 0.67, 95% CI 0.65-0.7, D-statistic = 0.98, 95% CI 0.8-1.2, calibration 
slope = 0.54, 95% CI 0.45-0.64) and acceptable accuracy predicting the 
probability of death (probability of death in 1 year, n high-risk group, test 
set: expected = 0.31, observed = 0.30; external dataset: expected = 0.22, 
observed = 0.27). The BARC compared favourably to existing index scores that can 
also be applied without specialist respiratory variables (area under the curve: 
BARC = 0.78, 95% CI 0.76-0.79; BODEx = 0.48, 95% CI 0.45-0.51; DOSE = 0.60, 95% 
CI 0.57-0.61; ADO = 0.68, 95% CI 0.66-0.69, external dataset: BARC = 0.70, 95% 
CI 0.67-0.72; BODEx = 0.41, 95% CI 0.38-0.45; DOSE = 0.52, 95% CI 0.49-0.55; 
ADO = 0.57, 95% CI 0.54-0.60).
CONCLUSION: The BARC index performed better than existing tools in predicting 
1-year mortality. Critically, the risk score only requires routinely collected 
non-specialist information which, therefore, could help identify patients seen 
in primary care that may benefit from palliative care.

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-019-1310-0
PMCID: PMC6449897
PMID: 30947728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
protocol for this research was approved by the Independent Scientific Advisory 
Committee (ISAC) for MHRA Database Research (protocol number 17_083). Generic 
ethical approval for observational research using CPRD with approval from ISAC 
has been granted by a Health Research Authority (HRA) Research Ethics Committee 
(East Midlands – Derby, REC reference number 05/MRE04/87). Linked pseudonymised 
data was provided for this study by CPRD. Data is linked by NHS Digital, the 
statutory trusted third party for linking data, using identifiable data held 
only by NHS Digital. Select practices consent to this process at a practice 
level with individual patients having the right to opt-out. CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: All authors have completed the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and declare 
the following. LS reports grants from Wellcome Trust during the conduct of the 
study; outside the submitted work, LS reports grants from Wellcome, MRC, NIHR, 
BHF and Diabetes UK and grants and personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline. JKQ, 
outside the submitted work, reports grants from The Health Foundation, MRC, and 
British Lung Foundation; grants and personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline; grants 
and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim; grants and personal fees from 
AstraZeneca; grants and personal fees form Chiesi; personal fees from Teva; 
grants and personal fees from Insmed; grants and personal fees from Bayer and 
grants from IQVIA. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard 
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


128. Aten Primaria. 2019 Jun-Jul;51(6):333-340. doi: 10.1016/j.aprim.2018.02.007. 
Epub 2018 Apr 13.

[Community-acquired pneumonia in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease treated with inhaled corticosteroids or other bronchodilators. Study 
PNEUMOCORT].

[Article in Spanish]

Morros R(1), Vedia C(2), Giner-Soriano M(1), Casellas A(3), Amado E(4), Baena 
JM(5); en representación de los investigadores del proyecto PNEUMOCORT.

Author information:
(1)Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Atenció Primària Jordi Gol (IDIAP 
Jordi Gol), Barcelona, España; Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, 
Cerdanyola del Vallès, España; Institut Català de la Salut, Generalitat de 
Catalunya, Barcelona, España.
(2)Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Atenció Primària Jordi Gol (IDIAP 
Jordi Gol), Barcelona, España; Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, 
Cerdanyola del Vallès, España; Unitat de Farmàcia, Servei d'Atenció Primària 
Barcelonès Nord i Maresme, Institut Català de la Salut, Badalona, España. 
Electronic address: cvedia.bnm.ics@gencat.cat.
(3)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int. Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital 
Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, España.
(4)Àmbit d'Atenció Barcelona Ciutat, Institut Català de la Salut, Barcelona, 
España.
(5)Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Atenció Primària Jordi Gol (IDIAP 
Jordi Gol), Barcelona, España; Centre de Salut la Marina, Institut Català de la 
Salut, Barcelona, España.

OBJECTIVES: To analyse the risk of pneumonia and/or exacerbations in patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who receive treatment with 
inhaled corticosteroids (CI), in comparison with those who are not treated with 
inhaled corticosteroids (NCI). To estimate the risk of pneumonia according to CI 
dose.
DESIGN: Population-based cohort study.
SETTING: Primary Healthcare. Institut Català de la Salut.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients ≥45 years-old diagnosed with COPD between 2007 and 2009 
in the Information System for Research in Primary Care (SIDIAP).
INTERVENTION: Two cohorts; patients initiating CI and patients initiating 
bronchodilators after COPD diagnosis.
MAIN MEASUREMENTS: Demographics, smoking, medical history, pneumonias, 
exacerbations, vaccinations, and drug therapy.
RESULTS: A total of 3,837 patients were included, 58% in the CI and 42% in the 
NCI group. Higher incidence rates of pneumonia and exacerbations were detected 
in the CI group compared with the NCI (2.18 vs. 1.37). The risk of pneumonia and 
severe exacerbations was not significantly different between groups, HR; 1.17 
(95% CI; 0.87-1.56) and 1.06 (95% CI; 0.87-1.31), respectively. Patients in the 
CI group had a higher risk of mild exacerbations, HR; 1.28 (95% CI; 1.10-1.50). 
Variables associated with a higher risk of pneumonia were age, diabetes, 
previous pneumonias and bronchitis, very severe COPD, treatment with low doses 
of β2-adrenergic or anticholinergic agents, and previous treatment with oral 
corticosteroids.
CONCLUSIONS: There were no differences between cohorts in the risk of pneumonia 
and severe exacerbations. The risk of mild exacerbations was higher in the CI 
group. Pneumonias and severe exacerbations were more frequent in patients with 
severe COPD and in patients receiving high doses of CI.

OBJETIVOS: Analizar el riesgo de neumonía y/o exacerbaciones en pacientes con 
enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crónica (EPOC) tratados con corticoides 
inhalados (CI) y no tratados con CI (NCI). Estimar el riesgo de neumonía según 
la dosis de CI.
DISEÑO: Estudio de cohortes de base poblacional.
EMPLAZAMIENTO: Atención Primaria. Institut Català de la Salut.
PARTICIPANTES: Pacientes ≥ 45 años diagnosticados de EPOC entre 2007 y 2009 en 
el Sistema de Información para el Desarrollo de la Investigación en Atención 
Primaria (SIDIAP).
INTERVENCIÓN: Dos cohortes; pacientes que inician CI y pacientes que inician 
broncodilatadores NCI después del diagnóstico de EPOC.
MEDICIONES PRINCIPALES: Sociodemográficas, tabaquismo, antecedentes patológicos, 
neumonías, exacerbaciones, vacunaciones y tratamientos farmacológicos.
RESULTADOS: Se incluyeron 3.837 pacientes: el 58% en el grupo CI y el 42% en el 
grupo NCI. Se detectaron incidencias superiores de neumonía y exacerbaciones en 
el grupo CI respecto al NCI (2,18 vs. 1,37). El riesgo de neumonía y de 
exacerbaciones graves no fue significativamente diferente entre grupos: HR de 
1,17 (IC 95%: 0,87-1,56) y de 1,06 (IC 95%: 0,87-1,31), respectivamente. En el 
grupo CI presentaron mayor riesgo de exacerbaciones leves, con HR de 1,28 (IC 
95%: 1,10-1,50). Las variables asociadas a mayor riesgo de neumonías fueron: 
edad, diabetes, neumonías y bronquitis previas, EPOC muy grave, tratamiento con 
β2-adrenérgicos o anticolinérgicos a dosis bajas, y tratamiento previo con 
corticoides orales.
CONCLUSIONES: No hubo diferencias entre cohortes en el riesgo de NAC ni 
exacerbaciones graves. Las exacerbaciones leves fueron superiores en el grupo 
CI. Tanto NAC como exacerbaciones graves fueron más frecuentes en pacientes con 
EPOC grave y en pacientes tratados con dosis altas de CI.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aprim.2018.02.007
PMCID: PMC6837040
PMID: 29661670


129. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Dec;59:101855. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101855. Epub 
2019 Oct 19.

Impact of ICS/LABA and LABA/LAMA FDCs on functional and clinical outcomes in 
COPD: A network meta-analysis.

Calzetta L(1), Di Marco F(2), Blasi F(3), Cazzola M(1), Centanni S(4), 
Micheletto C(5), Rossi A(6), Rogliani P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome "Tor 
Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Respiratory Unit ASST - 
Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy. Electronic address: 
fabiano.dimarco@unimi.it.
(3)Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Respiratory Unit and Adult Cystic Fibrosis Center, Department 
of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan Respiratory Unit, ASST 
Santi Paolo e Carlo, Milan, Italy.
(5)Cardio-Thoracic Department, Respiratory Unit, Integrated University Hospital, 
Verona, Italy.
(6)Respiratory Section, Department of Medicine, University of Verona, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2 agonist (LABA) 
fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) and LABA/long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
FDCs are extensively used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
The aim of the present network meta-analysis was to assess the comparative 
efficacy of all the currently available dual therapies in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD.
METHODS: A network meta-analysis (≥3 nodes, Bayesian method) was performed by 
searching for randomized clinical trials (RCTs) that compared the impact of 
different LABA/LAMA FDCs vs. ICS/LABA FDCs on both primary and secondary 
endpoints. The primary endpoints were: the change from baseline in trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) and the risk of exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD). 
The secondary endpoints were: peak FEV1, St' George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ), Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI), and rescue medication use.
RESULTS: Data of 17,734 COPD patients were extracted from 16 RCTs. The length of 
treatment ranged from 6 weeks to 52 weeks. All LABA/LAMA FDCs, except 
aclidinium/formoterol, produced a statistically significant improvement compared 
to ICS/LABAs in trough FEV1. The surface under the cumulative ranking curve 
(SUCRA) analysis indicated that umeclidinium/vilanterol, 
glycopyrronium/indacaterol and glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate were the most 
effective FDCs in improving trough FEV1. Across the FDCs analyzed for the risk 
of AECOPD, glycopyrronium/indacaterol significantly reduced the exacerbation 
risk compared to fluticasone propionate/salmeterol and resulted the most 
effective combination in the SUCRA analysis. Similar trend were also observed 
for the peak FEV1. No significant differences were detected across the 
investigated FDCs regarding SGRQ, TDI, and use of rescue medication.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this meta-analysis show that LABA/LAMA combinations 
are consistently more effective than ICS/LABA FDCs for most of the evaluated 
outcomes. However, differences have also been observed between FDCs belonging to 
the same class. Across the investigated LABA/LAMA FDCs, 
glycopyrronium/indacaterol revealed a consistent and robust efficacy profile.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101855
PMID: 31639476


130. Lab Invest. 2019 Feb;99(2):150-157. doi: 10.1038/s41374-018-0146-0. Epub 2018 
Nov 19.

Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor (HB-EGF) drives EMT in patients with 
COPD: implications for disease pathogenesis and novel therapies.

Eapen MS(1), Sharma P(2)(3), Thompson IE(1), Lu W(1), Myers S(1), Hansbro 
PM(4)(5), Sohal SS(6).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Translational Research Group, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
College of Health and Medicine, University of Tasmania, Launceston, TAS, 7248, 
Australia.
(2)Medical Sciences, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2007, 
Australia.
(3)Woolcock Emphysema Centre, Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2037, Australia.
(4)Priority Research Centre for Healthy Lungs, Hunter Medical Research Institute 
and The University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW, Australia.
(5)Centenary Institute and University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2007, 
Australia.
(6)Respiratory Translational Research Group, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
College of Health and Medicine, University of Tasmania, Launceston, TAS, 7248, 
Australia. sssohal@utas.edu.au.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive and devastating 
chronic lung condition that has a significant global burden, both medically and 
financially. Currently there are no medications that can alter the course of 
disease. At best, the drugs in clinical practice provide symptomatic relief to 
suffering patients by alleviating acute exacerbations. Most of current clinical 
research activities are in late severe disease with lesser attention given to 
early disease manifestations. There is as yet, a lack of understanding of the 
underlying mechanisms of disease progression and the molecular switches that are 
involved in their manifestation. Small airway fibrosis and obliteration are 
known to cause fixed airflow obstruction in COPD, and the consequential damage 
to the lung has an early onset. So far, there is little evidence of the 
mechanisms that underlie this aspect of pathology. However, emerging research 
confirms that airway epithelial reprogramming or epithelial to mesenchymal 
transition (EMT) is a key mechanism that drives fibrotic remodelling changes in 
smokers and patients with COPD. A recent study by Lai et al. further highlights 
the importance of EMT in smoking-related COPD pathology. The authors identify 
HB-EGF, an EGFR ligand, as a key driver of EMT and a potential new therapeutic 
target for the amelioration of EMT and airway remodelling. There are also wider 
implications in lung cancer prophylaxis, which is another major comorbidity 
associated with COPD. We consider that improved molecular understanding of the 
intricate pathways associated with epithelial cell plasticity in smokers and 
patients with COPD will have major therapeutic implications.

DOI: 10.1038/s41374-018-0146-0
PMID: 30451982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Postgrad Med. 2020 Mar;132(2):198-205. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1702834. Epub 
2020 Jan 3.

Current evidence for COPD management with dual long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist/long-acting β(2)-agonist bronchodilators.

Skolnik NS(1), Nguyen TS(2), Shrestha A(1), Ray R(3), Corbridge TC(3), Brunton 
SA(4).

Author information:
(1)Family/Community Medicine, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Jenkintown, PA, USA.
(2)Roseman University of Health Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Henderson, NV, 
USA.
(3)US Medical Affairs, GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(4)Primary Care Respiratory Group, Palm Springs, CA, USA.

Long-acting inhaled bronchodilator medications are recommended as initial 
maintenance therapy for many patients with COPD. These medications include 
long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) and long-acting β2-agonists (LABA). 
Combinations of long-acting bronchodilator agents (LAMA/LABA) and inhaled 
corticosteroids combined with LABA (ICS/LABA) are also used as initial or 
follow-up therapy in patients with more severe symptoms or at risk of COPD 
exacerbations. This review summarizes the position of LAMA/LABA combinations in 
treatment recommendations, and the evidence supporting their placement relative 
to LAMA monotherapy and ICS/LABA combination therapy, as well as differences 
within the LAMA/LABA class. Most studies show that LAMA/LABA treatment leads to 
greater improvements in lung function and symptoms than LAMA monotherapy or 
ICS/LABA treatment. There are fewer studies comparing the impact of different 
medication classes on patients' risk of exacerbations; however, the available 
evidence suggests that LAMA/LABA treatment and LAMA monotherapy lead to a 
similar reduction in exacerbation risk, while the effect of LAMA/LABA compared 
with ICS/LABA remains unclear. The incidence of adverse events is similar with 
LAMA/LABA and LAMA alone. There is a lower risk of pneumonia with LAMA/LABA 
compared with ICS/LABA. This evidence supports the use of LAMA/LABA combinations 
as an initial maintenance therapy option for symptomatic patients with low 
exacerbation risk and severe breathlessness or patients with severe symptoms who 
are at risk of exacerbations, and as follow-up treatment in patients with 
uncontrolled symptoms or exacerbations on bronchodilator monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1702834
PMID: 31900019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Clin Respir J. 2019 Mar;13(3):184-188. doi: 10.1111/crj.12994. Epub 2019 Feb 10.

Temporal trends in survival following ward-based NIV for acute hypercapnic 
respiratory failure in patients with COPD.

Trethewey SP(1), Edgar RG(2)(3), Morlet J(1), Mukherjee R(1), Turner AM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Medicine, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Therapy Services, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Non-invasive ventilation (NIV) is recommended for treatment of 
acute hypercapnic respiratory failure (AHRF) in acute exacerbations of COPD. 
National UK audit data suggests that mortality rates are rising in COPD patients 
treated with NIV.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate temporal trends in in-hospital mortality in COPD 
patients undergoing a first episode of ward-based NIV for AHRF.
METHODS: Retrospective study of hospitalised COPD patients treated with a first 
episode of ward-based NIV at a large UK teaching hospital between 2004 and 2017. 
Patients were split into two cohorts based on year of admission, 2004-2010 
(Cohort 1) and 2013-2017 (Cohort 2), to facilitate comparison of patient 
characteristics.
RESULTS: In total, 547 unique patients were studied. There was no difference in 
in-hospital mortality rate between the time periods studied (17.6% vs 20.5%, 
P = .378). In Cohort 2 there were more females, a higher rate of co-morbid 
bronchiectasis and pneumonia on admission and more severe acidosis, hypercapnia 
and hypoxia. More patients in Cohort 2 had NIV as the ceiling of treatment. 
Patients in Cohort 2 experienced a longer time from AHRF diagnosis to 
application of NIV, higher maximum inspiratory positive airway pressure, lower 
maximum oxygen and shorter duration of NIV. Finally, patients in Cohort 2 
experienced a shorter hospital length of stay (LOS), with no differences 
observed in rate of transfer to critical care or intubation.
CONCLUSION: In-hospital mortality remained stable and LOS decreased over time, 
despite greater comorbidity and more severe AHRF in COPD patients treated for 
the first time with ward-based NIV.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.12994
PMID: 30661288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Respir Res. 2019 Dec 9;20(1):279. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1241-5.

Serum bilirubin level is associated with exercise capacity and quality of life 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Leem AY(1), Kim YS(1), Lee JH(2), Kim TH(3), Kim HY(4), Oh YM(5), Lee SD(5), 
Jung JY(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Chest 
Disease, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 50-1 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, 
Seoul, 03722, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, 
Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Hanyang University Guri 
Hospital, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Guri, Republic of Korea.
(4)Biostatistics Collaboration Unit, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and Clinical Research 
Center for Chronic Obstructive Airway Diseases, Asan Medical Center, University 
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Chest 
Disease, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 50-1 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, 
Seoul, 03722, Republic of Korea. STOPYES@yuhs.ac.

BACKGROUND: Bilirubin has antioxidant properties against chronic respiratory 
diseases. However, previous studies are limited by acquisition of serum 
bilirubin level at one time point and its analysis with clinical parameters. We 
evaluated the association of serum bilirubin levels with various clinical 
outcomes of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in Korean Obstructive 
Lung Disease (KOLD) cohort.
METHODS: We included 535 patients with COPD from the KOLD cohort. Serum 
bilirubin levels and various clinical parameters, such as lung function, 6-min 
walking (6 MW) distance, quality of life (QoL), and exacerbation, were evaluated 
annually; their association was analyzed using generalized estimating equations 
and the linear mixed model.
RESULTS: Among 535 patients, 345 (64.5%) and 190 (35.5%) were categorized into 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) I-II and GOLD 
III-IV groups, respectively. 6 MW distance was positively associated with serum 
bilirubin levels, especially in the GOLD I-II group (estimated mean = 41.5). 
Among QoL indexes, the COPD assessment test score was negatively associated with 
serum bilirubin levels only in the GOLD I-II group (estimated mean = - 2.8). 
Higher serum bilirubin levels were independently associated with a higher number 
of acute exacerbation in the GOLD III-IV group (estimated mean = 0.45, 
P = 0.001). Multivariate analysis revealed that lung function and mortality were 
not associated with serum bilirubin levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher serum bilirubin levels were associated with a longer 6 MW 
distance and better QoL, especially in the GOLD I-II group, whereas they were 
related to a higher risk of acute exacerbation, especially in the GOLD III-IV 
group. Bilirubin levels may represent various conditions in COPD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1241-5
PMCID: PMC6902503
PMID: 31818285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


134. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jul 25;14:1595-1601. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S208245. eCollection 2019.

Comparison of clinical baseline characteristics between Asian and Western COPD 
patients in a prospective, international, multicenter study.

Kim KY(1), Miravitlles M(2)(3), Sliwinski P(4), Costello R(5), Carter V(6)(7), 
Tan J(8), Lapperre TS(8)(9), Alcazar B(10), Gouder C(11), Esquinas C(2)(12), 
García-Rivero JL(13), Kemppinen A(6), Tee A(14), Roman-Rodríguez M(15), 
Soler-Cataluña JJ(3)(16), Price D(6)(7)(17), Rhee CK(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Pneumology Department, University Hospital Vall d'Hebron/Vall d'Hebron 
Research Institute (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Madrid, Spain.
(4)2nd Department of Respiratory Medicine, Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung 
Diseases, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(6)Optimum Patient Care, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Centre of Academic Primary Care, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Singhealth Duke-NUS Medical Academic Clinical Programme, Duke-NUS Medical 
School, Singapore.
(10)Respiratory Department, Hospital de Alta Resolución de Loja, Madrid, Spain.
(11)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Mater Dei Hospital, L-Imsida, Malta.
(12)Public Health, Mental, Maternal and Child Health Nursing Department, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Hospital Comarcal de Laredo, Cantabria, Spain.
(14)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Changi General 
Hospital, Singapore.
(15)Primary Health-care Center Son Pisà, IB-Salut, Palma, Spain.
(16)Pneumology Department, Hospital Arnau de Vilanova, Valencia, Spain.
(17)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute, Singapore.

We aimed to compare clinical characteristics between Asian and Western chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients. This was a sub-analysis of an 
international, multicenter, prospective cohort study. Asian patients were 
enrolled in Singapore and South Korea. Western patients were enrolled in Spain, 
Poland, Ireland, the United Kingdom, and Malta. A total of 349 patients were 
analyzed. Among them, 110 (32%) patients were Asian and 239 (68%) Western. Male 
sex was more predominant in Asian than in Western (95% versus 63%, respectively; 
P<0.01). Body mass index was significantly lower in Asian (23.5 versus 27.1; 
P<0.01). The proportion of patients with a history of exacerbation was lower in 
Asian (12% versus 64%; P<0.01). Although patients were enrolled by same 
inclusion criteria, there were several differences between Asian and Western 
COPD patients. Our study has shown unbiased real-world differences between Asian 
and Western COPD patients. Since prospective follow-up study is currently 
ongoing, the result of this study can be fundamental base of future analysis.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S208245
PMCID: PMC6664421
PMID: 31440042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Marc Miravitlles received speaker and/or 
consulting and personal fees from AstraZeneca, Bial, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Cipla, CSL Behring, Laboratorios Esteve, Ferrer, Gebro Pharma, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Menarini, Mereo Biopharma, Novartis, pH Pharma, Rovi, 
TEVA, Verona Pharma and Zambon, and research grants from GlaxoSmithKline and 
Grifols outside the submitted. Professor Pawel Sliwinski received speaker fees 
and non-financial support from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Novartis, Roche and Teva, and consulting fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Chiesi, Grifols, Novartis, and Roche, 
outside the submitted work. Dr CK Rhee received consulting/lecture fees from 
MSD, AstraZeneca, Novartis, GSK, Takeda, Mundipharma, Sandoz, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, and Teva-Handok. Dr Richard Costelloe has board membership 
with GSK, Aerogen, Novartis, and Teva Pharmaceuticals; consultancy agreements 
with, Aerogen, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Teva Pharmaceuticals, and Vitalograph 
as well as grants and unrestricted funding for investigator-initiated studies 
from Vitalograph, Aerogen and GlaxoSmithKline. Dr Bernardino Alcazar reports 
personal fees grants, and non-financial support from Novartis AG, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, GSK, personal fees from AztraZeneca, grants and personal 
fees from Laboratorios Menarini, Laboratorios Rovi, Laboratorios Ferrer, outside 
the submitted work, in addition, he has a patent WO2018/215686A1 issued. Dr 
Augustine Tee received research fund from The Respiratory Effectiveness Group, 
during the conduct of the study; has participated as a member of the local COPD 
advisory board for AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Bayer, Takeda, and Novartis, 
and has received meeting/conference travel grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Novartis, AstraZeneca, and GlaxoSmithKline. Ms Victoria Carter reports funding 
this study by an unrestricted grant from Novartis AG, during the conduct of the 
study; also she is an employee of the Observational and Pragmatic Research 
Institute Pte Ltd (OPRI), and Optimum Patient Care. Dr Juan José Soler-Cataluña 
has received speaker fees from AstraZeneca, grants, personal fees, non-financial 
support from Boehringer Ingelheim, non-financial support from Chiesi, Esteve, 
Ferrer, GSK, Menarini, Novartis, and Pfizer, and consulting fees from 
AirLiquide, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, AstraZeneca, Ferrer, and Novartis 
outside the submitted work. Professor David Price has board membership with 
Aerocrine, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Mylan, Mundipharma, 
Napp, Novartis, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi Genzyme, Teva Pharmaceuticals; 
consultancy agreements with Almirall, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals, Theravance; grants and unrestricted funding for 
investigator-initiated studies (conducted through Observational and Pragmatic 
Research Institute Pte Ltd) from Aerocrine, AKL Research and Development Ltd, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, British Lung Foundation, Chiesi, Mylan, 
Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Pfizer, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Respiratory 
Effectiveness Group, Sanofi Genzyme, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Theravance, UK 
National Health Service, Zentiva (Sanofi Generics); payment for 
lectures/speaking engagements from Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Cipla, GlaxoSmithKline, Kyorin, Mylan, Merck, Mundipharma, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi Genzyme, Skyepharma, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals; payment for manuscript preparation from Mundipharma, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals; payment for the development of educational materials from 
Mundipharma, Novartis; payment for travel/accommodation/meeting expenses from 
Aerocrine, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals; funding for patient enrolment or completion of research from 
Chiesi, Novartis, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Zentiva (Sanofi Generics); stock/stock 
options from AKL Research and Development Ltd which produces 
phytopharmaceuticals; owns 74% of the social enterprise Optimum Patient Care Ltd 
(Australia and UK) and 74% of Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte 
Ltd (Singapore); and is peer reviewer for grant committees of the Efficacy and 
Mechanism Evaluation programme, and Health Technology Assessment. Dr Miguel 
Roman-Rodríguez has received speaker fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, Gebro Pharma, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini, Mundipharma, 
Novartis, Pfizer, and Teva, and consulting/personal fees from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis outside the submitted work. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


135. J Clin Nurs. 2019 May;28(9-10):1925-1935. doi: 10.1111/jocn.14814. Epub 2019 Feb 
15.

Acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) experiences 
among COPD patients with comorbid gastrooesophageal reflux disease.

Lin YH(1), Tsai CL(2), Tsao LI(3), Jeng C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, College of Nursing, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)College of Nursing, National Taipei University of Nursing and Health 
Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To explore perceptions of experience exacerbations of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease among chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease patients with comorbid gastrooesophageal reflux disease by focusing on 
unravelling how patients differentiate and react to symptoms of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease and gastrooesophageal reflux disease.
BACKGROUND: While gastrooesophageal reflux disease has been suggested to be a 
risk factor for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations, no study 
has explored perceptions of the symptoms leading up to severe exacerbation of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease events among chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease patients with comorbid gastrooesophageal reflux disease.
DESIGN: Qualitative design.
METHODS: The analysis was performed in accordance with principles of Grounded 
Theory methodology. Data were collected via semi-structured interviews from 12 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients with endoscopy-diagnosed 
gastrooesophageal reflux disease who had experienced a chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease exacerbation with hospitalisation. Appraisal and analysis 
using consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ) checklist 
were undertaken.
RESULTS: The core category of this study was the ineffective management of 
exacerbation symptoms, which was associated with perceived symptoms 
pre-exacerbation which contained three overlapping categories of symptom 
presentation experienced, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease-related 
coping strategies, high anxiety and a sense of helplessness in disease 
management.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with 
comorbid gastrooesophageal reflux disease presented with some distinctly 
different atypical symptoms yet used common respiratory symptom management 
strategies. Patients and practitioners alike need to be more aware of the 
possibility of other symptoms such as nonspecific symptoms being clues of 
exacerbation onset for a more effective intervention.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: The medical community needs to educate patients 
to understand and manage not only chronic obstructive pulmonary disease but also 
gastrooesophageal reflux disease symptoms so that they are better able to 
identify the cause of their symptoms, treat them appropriately and seek out 
medical assistance when necessary.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.14814
PMID: 30698890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Ther Umsch. 2019 Nov;76(6):311-316. doi: 10.1024/0040-5930/a001100.

Kortikosteroide in der Behandlung des Asthmas und der COPD.

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Rothe T(1).

Author information:
(1)Spital Davos, Pneumologie, Davos.

The data situation for the use of ICS in asthma is clear. In the case of COPD, 
on the other hand, where in recent years the pendulum has moved away from ICS 
towards a dual therapy based on LABA / LAMA, the discussion is open again thanks 
to new work. However, it would certainly be wrong to recommend ICS as a 
meaningful therapy for all COPD patients at this point in time, since therapy 
with ICS is associated with side effects, in particular an increase in the risk 
of developing pneumonia or osteoporosis. However, there is no doubt that 
patients with asthma COPD overlap require ICS therapy.

Publisher: Zusammenfassung. Zum Einsatz von ICS beim Asthma ist die Datenlage 
klar. Bei der COPD hingegen, bei der in den letzten Jahren das Pendel weg von 
ICS, hin zu einer dualen Therapie aus LABA / LAMA geschwungen war, ist die 
Diskussion durch neue Arbeiten wieder offen. Es wäre aber sicher falsch, zum 
jetzigen Zeitpunkt ICS als sinnvolle Therapie für alle COPD-Patienten zu 
empfehlen, da die Therapie mit ICS mit Nebenwirkungen behaftet ist, v. a. der 
Erhöhung des Risikos an einer Pneumonie bzw. einer Osteoporose zu erkranken. 
Keinen Zweifel gibt es aber daran, dass Patienten mit Asthma COPD Overlap einer 
ICS-Therapie bedürfen.

DOI: 10.1024/0040-5930/a001100
PMID: 31762414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2019 Aug 30;47(278):70-71.

Generalized emphysema and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in a farmer, 
non-smoker - the more we seek, the more we find.

Damiański P(1), Kuna P(1), Panek M(1).

Author information:
(1)The Clinical Department of Internal Diseases, Asthma and Allergies with the 
Pediatric Subdepartment, N. Barlicki University Teaching Hospital no. 1 in Lodz, 
Poland.

Although alpha-1 antitrypsin (A1AT) deficiency represents one of the most common 
genetically conditioned diseases in the population of Caucasian adult 
individuals, it is rarely diagnosed. Alpha-1 antitrypsin is an important 
component of the anti-proteolytic protection in the lungs. Individuals affected 
by the protein deficiency are exposed to a higher risk of developing chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), emphysema or liver diseases.
A CASE REPORT: A 52-year-old farmer, non-smoker, spraying orchards since the age 
of 15 years, was admitted to the Department with dyspnea at rest and productive 
cough. He had a medical history of COPD, congestive heart failure, generalized 
emphysema of ten years' duration On admission the patient's general condition 
was satisfactory (fair). Physical examination showed symmetric expiratory 
wheezing over the upper and lower fields of the lungs with loss of vesicular 
murmur in the lower fields. Spirometry revealed a severe chronic bronchial 
obstruction, and an arterial blood gas test showed hypoxemia. Laboratory tests 
demonstrated an increased concentration of inflammatory markers. High resolution 
computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest showed evidence of generalized 
emphysema, bronchiectasis and exacerbation of peribronchial inflammatory 
changes. Intensive anti-inflammatory, bronchodilator treatment and antibiotic 
therapy were implemented, which resulted in an optimal improvement of the 
patient's condition. Based on the whole clinical picture A1AT deficiency was 
suspected. Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency, MZ phenotype, with 65 mg/dl 
concentration was diagnosed.
CONCLUSIONS: Diagnostic tests for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency should always 
be considered in patients with emphysema or symptomatic COPD identified at an 
early age. In the described case the period between occurrence of clinical signs 
and establishing the diagnosis was ten years, which proves that there is a 
strong need to spread knowledge on A1AT among medical professionals. Otherwise, 
most of the patients will lose their chance of modifying their lifestyle or 
receiving proper treatment that could prevent the progression of changes in the 
lungs.

© 2019 MEDPRESS.

PMID: 31473756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Semergen. 2019 Jan-Feb;45(1):15-22. doi: 10.1016/j.semerg.2018.04.009. Epub 2018 
Oct 22.

[Effectiveness of a brief educational intervention relating to the correct use 
of inhalers on the prevention of exacerbation in patients suffering from chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez Ibán M(1), Alonso Porcel C(2), Sánchez Rodríguez LM(3), Arce Rodríguez 
A(4), Díaz Pérez P(2), Arboleya Álvarez L(2).

Author information:
(1)Médico de Atención Primaria, Avilés, Asturias, España. Electronic address: 
martamartineziban@gmail.com.
(2)Médico de Urgencias, Hospital Universitario de Cabueñes, Gijón, Asturias, 
España.
(3)Médico de Atención Primaria, Centro de Salud de Vegadeo, Vegadeo, Asturias, 
España.
(4)Médico de Urgencias, Hospital Álvarez-Buylla, Mieres, Asturias, España.

OBJECTIVE: To predict the effect of a brief educational intervention aimed at 
improving the inhaler technique on the reduction of exacerbations in patients 
with COPD over a year.
MATHERIAL AND METHODS: A triple blind, randomised controlled clinical trial with 
parallel design.
INCLUSION CRITERIA: to be between 40-75 years, having been diagnosed with COPD, 
and being on treatment with inhalers. A total of 97 patients were randomly 
selected. They were randomly assigned into 2groups according to their functional 
severity measured with spirometry. Intervention group: evaluation of the 
inhalation technique. Their mistakes were corrected using a brief educational 
intervention. Reinforcement visits were made in the second and seventh month.
CONTROL GROUP: evaluation of the inhalation technique. No educational 
intervention was made. After 1 year of follow-up, the number of exacerbations in 
each group was checked.
VARIABLES MEASURED: social and demographic, study, dyspnoea level, body-mass 
index, tobacco use, FEV1, FEV1/FVC, COPD stage, BODEX index, number, type, and 
inhaler technique, number of previous exacerbations. Bayesian inference analysis 
was performed using logistic regression models.
RESULTS: A total of 56 patients were assigned to de intervention group and 41 to 
the control one. There were 16 and 14 lost to follow-up, respectively. In the 
intervention group, 44.6% of the patients had an exacerbation, compared to the 
control group, with 56.1%. OR adjusted = 0.57 (95% CI: 0.22-1.22). Posterior 
probability OR < 1 = 93%. Exacerbations which required hospital admission had an 
OR = 0.21 (95% CI: 0.02-0.75) with posterior probability OR < 1= 99%.
CONCLUSIONS: A brief educational technique is an effective method for reducing 
the number of exacerbations in patients with COPD.

Copyright © 2018 Sociedad Española de Médicos de Atención Primaria (SEMERGEN). 
Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semerg.2018.04.009
PMID: 30360898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Respir Med. 2019 Jun;152:37-43. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.04.018. Epub 2019 Apr 
26.

Use of aclidinium did not increase the risk of death in a noninterventional 
cohort study in the Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD), United Kingdom.

Rebordosa C(1), Aguado J(2), Plana E(2), Thomas S(3), Frances A(4), Lei A(4), 
García-Gil E(4), Nuevo J(5), Perez-Gutthann S(2), Castellsague J(2).

Author information:
(1)RTI Health Solutions, Av. Diagonal 605, 9-1, 08028, Barcelona, Spain. 
Electronic address: crebordosa@rti.org.
(2)RTI Health Solutions, Av. Diagonal 605, 9-1, 08028, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)RTI Health Solutions, 200 Park Offices Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
27709, United States.
(4)AstraZeneca, Avda. Diagonal, 615 2nd floor, 08028, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)AstraZeneca, Serrano Galvache 56, 28033, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Aclidinium bromide is an inhaled long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA). Although the initial potential increased cardiovascular and mortality 
risk among users of tiotropium has been ruled out by several observational 
studies, and clinical trials, there are still concerns related to the use of 
newer LAMA medications. The current study aimed to evaluate the risk of death 
among users of aclidinium and other LAMAs.
METHODS: We conducted a cohort and nested case-control study among patients with 
COPD aged 40 years or older to compare the risk of all-cause mortality among 
users of aclidinium and other COPD medications with the risk among users of 
long-acting β2 agonists (LABA), in the Clinical Practice Research Datalink 
(CPRD) in the United Kingdom (2012-2017).
RESULTS: Mortality rates per 1,000 person-years were 32.9 for aclidinium, 43.8 
for tiotropium, 38.0 for other LAMA, 47.1 for LABA/ICS, and 38.1 for LABA. The 
RR of death compared with current use of LABA was 0.54 (confidence interval [95% 
CI], 0.40-0.72) for aclidinium, 0.96 (95% CI, 0.76-1.21) for tiotropium, 0.76 
(95% CI, 0.58-0.99) for other LAMA, and 1.08 (95% CI, 0.90-1.31) for LABA/ICS. 
Decreased risk for death observed among users of aclidinium was driven by 
overall current single use (RR = 0.41; 95% CI, 0.22-0.79), which corresponded to 
26% of the aclidinium users (<15 cases) and not by multiple use (RR = 1.02; 95% 
CI, 0.71-1.48).
CONCLUSION: Use of aclidinium, tiotropium, other LAMA, or LABA/ICS was not 
associated with an increased risk of all-cause mortality as compared with the 
use of LABAs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.04.018
PMID: 31128608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Apr 24;20(8):2024. doi: 10.3390/ijms20082024.

FKBP5 rs4713916: A Potential Genetic Predictor of Interindividual Different 
Response to Inhaled Corticosteroids in Patients with Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease in a Real-Life Setting.

Russo P(1), Tomino C(2), Santoro A(3), Prinzi G(4), Proietti S(5), Kisialiou 
A(6), Cardaci V(7), Fini M(8), Magnani M(9), Collacchi F(10), Provinciali M(11), 
Giacconi R(12), Bonassi S(13), Malavolta M(14).

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Via di 
Valcannuta, 247 00166 Rome, Italy. patrizia_russo@hotmail.it.
(2)Scientific Direction, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, 0166 Rome, Italy. 
carlo.tomino@sanraffaele.it.
(3)Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Via di 
Valcannuta, 247 00166 Rome, Italy. alessiasantoro92@gmail.com.
(4)Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Via di 
Valcannuta, 247 00166 Rome, Italy. giulia.prinzi@gmail.com.
(5)Scientific Direction, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, 0166 Rome, Italy. 
stefania.proietti@sanraffaele.it.
(6)Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Via di 
Valcannuta, 247 00166 Rome, Italy. alesseus@gmail.com.
(7)Pulmonary Rehabilitation, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, 00166 Rome, Italy. 
vittorio.cardaci@sanraffaele.it.
(8)Scientific Direction, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, 0166 Rome, Italy. 
massimo.fini@sanraffaele.it.
(9)Department of Biomolecular Science-Section of Biotechnology, University of 
Urbino "Carlo Bo", 61032 Fano, Italy. mauro.magnani@uniurb.it.
(10)Diatheva Srl, 61030 Pesaro e Urbino, Italy. f.collacchi@diatheva.com.
(11)Advanced Technology Center for Aging Research, Scientific Technological 
Area, IRCCS INRCA, 60124 Ancona, Italy. m.provinciali@inrca.it.
(12)Advanced Technology Center for Aging Research, Scientific Technological 
Area, IRCCS INRCA, 60124 Ancona, Italy. r.giacconi@inrca.it.
(13)Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Via di 
Valcannuta, 247 00166 Rome, Italy. Stefano.bonassi@sanraffaele.it.
(14)Advanced Technology Center for Aging Research, Scientific Technological 
Area, IRCCS INRCA, 60124 Ancona, Italy. M.MALAVOLTA@inrca.it.

Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common, 
preventable, and manageable lung disease characterized by large heterogeneity in 
disease presentation and grades impairment. Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are 
commonly used to manage COPD/COPD-exacerbation. The patient's response is 
characterized by interindividual variability without disease 
progression/survival modification. Objectives: We hypothesize that a therapeutic 
intervention may be more effective if single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are 
investigated. Methods: In 71 COPD patients under pulmonary rehabilitation, a 
small number of powerful SNPs, selected according to current literature, were 
analyzed; namely the glucocorticoid receptor gene NR3C1 
(rs6190/rs6189/rs41423247), the glucocorticoid-induced transcript 1 gene (GLCCI1 
rs37972), and the related co-chaperone FKBP5 gene (rs4713916). MDR1 rs2032582 
was also evaluated. Lung function outcomes were assessed. Results: A significant 
association with functional outcomes, namely FEV1 (forced expiration volume/one 
second) and 6MWD (six-minutes walking distance), was found for rs4713916 and 
weakly for rs37972. The genotype rs4713916(GA) and, in a lesser extent, the 
genotype rs37972(TT), were more favorable than the wild-type. Conclusions: Our 
study supports a possible picture of pharmacogenomic control for COPD 
intervention. rs4713916 and, possibly, rs37972 may be useful predictors of 
clinical outcome. These results may help to tailor an optimal dose for 
individual COPD patients based on their genetic makeup.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20082024
PMCID: PMC6514776
PMID: 31022961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Mauro Magnani (University of Urbino and Diatheva 
SrL) holds stocks in Diatheva and Francesco Collacchi (Diatheva SrL, Italy) is a 
Diatheva employee.


141. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2020 Feb;21(2):213-231. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2019.1701656.

The pharmacological management of asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
overlap syndrome (ACOS).

Albertson TE(1)(2)(3), Chenoweth JA(2)(3), Pearson SJ(1)(3), Murin S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of California, Davis, 
Sacramento, CA, USA.
(3)Veterans Administration Northern California Health Care System, Department of 
Medicine, Mather, CA, USA.

Introduction: Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome 
(ACOS) is a disease phenotype that shares T helper lymphocyte cell 
Th1/neutrophilic/non-Type-2 Inflammation pathways thought to be key in COPD and 
Th2/eosinophilic/Type-2 inflammatory pathways of asthma. The pharmacology of 
treating ACOS is challenging in severe circumstances.Areas covered: This review 
evaluates the stepwise treatment of ACOS using pharmacological treatments used 
in both COPD and asthma. The most common medications involve the same inhalers 
used to treat COPD and asthma patients. Advanced stepwise therapies for ACOS 
patients are based on patient characteristics and biomarkers. Very few clinical 
trials exist that focus specifically on ACOS patients.Expert opinion: After 
inhalers, advanced therapies including phosphodiesterase inhibitors, macrolides, 
N-acetylcysteine and statin therapy for those ACOS patients with a COPD 
appearance and exacerbations are available. In atopic ACOS patients with 
exacerbations, advanced asthma therapies (leukotriene receptor antagonists and 
synthesis blocking agents.) are used. ACOS patients with elevated blood 
eosinophil/IgE levels are considered for immunotherapy or therapeutic monoclonal 
antibodies blocking specific Th2/Type-2 interleukins or IgE. Symptom control, 
stabilization/improvement in pulmonary function and reduced exacerbations are 
the metrics of success. More pharmacological trials of ACOS patients are needed 
to better understand which patients benefit from specific 
treatments.Abbreviations: 5-LOi: 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor; ACOS: asthma - COPD 
overlap syndrome; B2AR: Beta2 adrenergic receptors; cAMP: cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate; cGMP: cyclic guanosine monophosphate; CI: confidence interval; 
COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CRS : chronic rhinosinusitis; 
cys-LT: cysteinyl leukotrienes; DPI: dry powder inhaler; EMA: European Medicines 
Agency; FDA: US Food and Drug Administration; FDC: fixed-dose combination; FeNO: 
exhaled nitric oxide; FEV1: forced expiratory volume in one second; FVC: forced 
vital capacity; GM-CSF: granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; ICS : 
inhaled corticosteroids; IL: interleukin; ILC2: Type 2 innate lymphoid cells; 
IP3: Inositol triphosphate; IRR: incidence rate ratio; KOLD: Korean Obstructive 
Lung Disease; LABA: long-acting B2 adrenergic receptor agonist; LAMA: 
long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist; LRA: leukotriene receptor 
antagonist; LT: leukotrienes; MDI: metered-dose inhalers; MN: M-subtype 
muscarinic receptors; MRA: muscarinic receptor antagonist; NAC: 
N-acetylcysteine; NEB: nebulization; OR: odds ratio; PDE: phosphodiesterase; 
PEFR: peak expiratory flow rate; PGD2: prostaglandin D2; PRN: as needed; RR: 
risk ratio; SABA: short-acting B2 adrenergic receptor agonist; SAMA: 
short-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist; SDMI: spring-driven mist inhaler; 
Th1: T helper cell 1 lymphocyte; Th2: T helper cell 2 lymphocytes; TNF-α: tumor 
necrosis factor alpha; US : United States.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2019.1701656
PMID: 31955671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Front Pharmacol. 2019 Apr 25;10:390. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.00390. eCollection 
2019.

Single Inhaler LABA/LAMA for COPD.

Malerba M(1)(2), Foci V(1)(2), Patrucco F(1)(2), Pochetti P(1)(2), Nardin M(3), 
Pelaia C(4), Radaeli A(5).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Department of Translational Medicine, University of 
Eastern Piedmont, Vercelli, Italy.
(2)Respiratory Unit, Sant'Andrea Hospital, Vercelli, Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine, Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Section of Respiratory Diseases, 
University "Magna Græcia" of Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.
(5)Department of Emergency, Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common disabling disease 
characterized by progressive airflow obstruction. Great efforts were spent in 
the development of drugs able to improve symptoms, quality of life, reduce 
exacerbations, hospitalizations and the frequency of death of patients with 
COPD. The cornerstones of treatment are bronchodilator drugs of two different 
classes: beta agonists and muscarinic antagonists. Currently the Global 
initiative for COPD suggests the use of long acting beta agonists (LABAs) and 
long acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) in combination for the majority of 
COPD patients, thus great interest is associated with the developing of 
LAMA/LABA fixed combination in the maintenance treatment of stable COPD. Many 
LAMA/LABA fixed dose combinations have been licensed in different countries and 
the clinical use of these drugs stimulated the performance of many clinical 
trials. The purpose of this review is a complete criticism of pharmacological 
and clinical aspects related to the use of LAMA/LABA single inhalers for the 
maintenance treatment of stable COPD, with particular mention to the most 
debated topics and future prospects in the field.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2019.00390
PMCID: PMC6494943
PMID: 31105560


143. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2019 Jul 1;23(7):817-823. doi: 10.5588/ijtld.18.0429.

Red blood cell distribution width is an independent predictor of mortality for 
an acute exacerbation of COPD.

Hu GP(1), Zhou YM(2), Wu ZL(1), Li YQ(1), Liang WQ(1), Wei LP(1), Ran PX(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Third Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong.
(2)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, State Key Laboratory of 
Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: The prognostic role of the red blood cell distribution width (RDW) 
on an acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) is 
incompletely understood.OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of the RDW on 
in-hospital and 1-year mortality after an AECOPD.DESIGN: For 442 AECOPD 
patients, the RDW was measured and clinical characteristics, comorbidities and 
laboratory measurements were recorded. The RDW that discriminated survivors and 
non-survivors was determined using a receiver operator characteristic (ROC) 
curve. The risk factors for in-hospital and 1-year mortality were identified 
through logistic regression analysis and Cox regression analysis, 
respectively.RESULTS: Of 442 study patients, 31 died, and 411 survived while in 
hospital. The area under the ROC curve for RDW for in-hospital death was 0.726 
(95%CI 0.631-0.822), with sensitivity of 0.71 and specificity of 0.64 for a 
cut-off point of 13.75%. An RDW ≥13.75% was a risk factor for in-hospital 
mortality (relative risk 4.30, 95%CI 1.98-9.58; P < 0.001). Univariate and 
multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that an RDW ≥13.75% was an 
independent risk factor for death at 1 year (univariate analysis, hazard ration 
[HR] 2.33, 95%CI 1.55-3.51; multivariate analysis, HR 1.64, 95%CI 
1.08-2.50).CONCLUSION: The RDW was a strong and independent risk factor for 
in-hospital and 1-year death for AECOPD patients.

DOI: 10.5588/ijtld.18.0429
PMID: 31439113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Drugs. 2019 Jan;79(1):85-91. doi: 10.1007/s40265-018-1036-x.

Revefenacin: First Global Approval.

Heo YA(1).

Author information:
(1)Springer, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New Zealand. 
dru@adis.com.

Erratum in
    Drugs. 2019 Mar 29;:

Revefenacin (YUPELRI™) inhalation solution, a long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(i.e. an anticholinergic) developed by Theravance Biopharma and Mylan, is the 
first and currently the only once-daily, nebulized bronchodilator to be approved 
in the USA for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In 
November 2018, based on results of three phase III trials, the US Food and Drug 
Administration granted market authorization to revefenacin for the maintenance 
treatment of patients with COPD. This article summarizes the milestones in the 
development of revefenacin leading to this first global approval.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-018-1036-x
PMCID: PMC6445810
PMID: 30560478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: During the peer review process the manufacturer 
of the agent under review was offered an opportunity to comment on the article. 
Changes resulting from any comments received were made by the author on the 
basis of scientific completeness and accuracy. Young-A Heo is a salaried 
employee of Adis/Springer, is responsible for the article content and declares 
no relevant conflicts of interest


145. J Palliat Care. 2019 Apr;34(2):85-91. doi: 10.1177/0825859718819437. Epub 2018 
Dec 26.

Promoting Primary Palliative Care in Severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease: Symptom Management and Preparedness Planning.

Ansari AA(1), Pomerantz DH(2)(3), Jayes RL(4), Aguirre EA(5), Havyer RD(6).

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Hospital Medicine, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, 
IL, USA.
(2)2 Division of General Internal Medicine and Department of Family Medicine 
(Palliative Care), Albert Einstein College of Medicine Bronx, New York, NY, USA.
(3)3 Department of Medicine, Montefiore New Rochelle Hospital, New Rochelle, NY, 
USA.
(4)4 Division of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine, George Washington 
University Medical Faculty Associates, Washington, DC, USA.
(5)5 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)6 Division of Community Internal Medicine and Center for Palliative Medicine, 
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) poses challenges not only in 
symptom management but also in prognostication. Managing COPD requires 
clinicians to be proficient in the primary palliative care skills of symptom 
management and communication focused on eliciting goals and preferences. Dyspnea 
should initially be managed with the combination of long-acting muscarinic 
antagonists and long-acting β-agonist inhalers, adding inhaled corticosteroids 
if symptoms persist. Opioids for the relief of dyspnea are safe when used at 
appropriate doses. Oxygen is only effective for relieving dyspnea in patients 
with severe hypoxemia. The relapsing-remitting nature of COPD makes 
prognostication challenging; however, there are tools to guide clinicians and 
patients in making plans both with respect to prognosis and symptom burden. 
Preparedness planning techniques promote detailed culturally appropriate 
conversations which allow patients and clinicians to consider disease-specific 
complications and develop goal-concordant treatment plans.

DOI: 10.1177/0825859718819437
PMID: 30587083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2019 Jul;75(7):1025-1032. doi: 10.1007/s00228-019-02667-4. 
Epub 2019 Mar 22.

Discontinuation of therapy among COPD patients who experience an improvement in 
exacerbation status.

Reilev M(1)(2), Kristensen KB(3), Søndergaard J(4), Henriksen DP(5), Thompson 
W(4), Pottegård A(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Department of Public Health, University 
of Southern Denmark, Odense C, Denmark. mreilev@health.sdu.dk.
(2)Research Unit of General Practice, Department of Public Health, University of 
Southern Denmark, JB Winsløwsvej 19, 2, 5000, Odense C, Denmark. 
mreilev@health.sdu.dk.
(3)Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Department of Public Health, University 
of Southern Denmark, Odense C, Denmark.
(4)Research Unit of General Practice, Department of Public Health, University of 
Southern Denmark, JB Winsløwsvej 19, 2, 5000, Odense C, Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Biochemistry & Pharmacology, Odense University 
Hospital, Odense C, Denmark.

PURPOSE: A subset of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
experience a decrease in exacerbation frequency, leading to a diminished need 
for treatment with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). We investigated prescribing 
and discontinuation patterns of long-acting bronchodilators and ICS in COPD 
patients according to exacerbation frequency.
METHODS: Using the nationwide Danish health registries, we conducted a drug 
utilization study among patients who had at least two exacerbations or one 
hospitalization due to an exacerbation during 2011-2012. This study population 
was stratified according to consistency of exacerbation occurrence after 12, 24, 
36, and 48 months of follow-up and the groups were described according to use of 
ICS, long-acting β2-agonists (LABA), and long-acting anticholinergics (LAMA), 
and combinations thereof.
RESULTS: We identified 29,010 COPD exacerbators during 2011-2012. Upon 
inclusion, 70% received ICS-containing regimens, in combination with LABA (23%) 
or both LABA and LAMA (41%). The proportion of prevalent users of ICS-containing 
regimens decreased to 56% during follow-up among exacerbation-free individuals, 
while it increased to 86% in individuals who experienced at least one 
exacerbation annually. Persistence to ICS-containing regimens was 58% after 
4 years in individuals without exacerbations compared to 74% among those with 
annual exacerbations. Similar patterns were observed for triple therapy which 
was the most extensively used drug combination regardless of consistency of 
exacerbation occurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: The extensive use of ICS and the relatively high persistence to 
ICS-containing regimens in individuals who had a decrease in exacerbation 
occurrence highlight a need for the development and implementation of 
de-escalation strategies in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-019-02667-4
PMID: 30903196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2019 Mar;25(2):158-164. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000555.

Procalcitonin and other markers to guide antibiotic use in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease exacerbations in the era of antimicrobial resistance.

Wang J(1), Cao B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Luhe Hospital, 
Capital Medical University.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center for Respiratory 
Diseases, China-Japan Friendship Hospital National Clinical Research Center of 
Respiratory Diseases Capital Medical University.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes the latest discoveries regarding the 
use of clinical indicators and biomarkers to guide antibiotic use in patients 
with acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD), and 
it analyzes the advantages and disadvantages of various indicators and markers.
RECENT FINDINGS: For AECOPD patients admitted to emergency departments and 
medical wards, procalcitonin (PCT)-guided antibiotic therapy reduced antibiotic 
use without adverse outcomes. In contrast, for severe AECOPD patients admitted 
to ICUs, PCT-guided antibiotic therapy increased the overall mortality in a 
3-month follow-up period, and antibiotic use was not decreased.
SUMMARY: PCT is the most promising biomarker to guide antibiotic use in patients 
with AECOPD. However, patients with severe AECOPD admitted in ICU may not 
benefit from PCT-guided antibiotic therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000555
PMID: 30550505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. BMC Fam Pract. 2019 Mar 26;20(1):45. doi: 10.1186/s12875-019-0934-7.

Use of delayed antibiotic prescription in primary care: a cross-sectional study.

de la Poza Abad M(1), Mas Dalmau G(2), Gich Saladich I(2)(3), Martínez García 
L(2), Llor C(4), Alonso-Coello P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Dr Carles Ribas Primary Care Center, C/Foc 112, 08038, Barcelona, Spain. 
mariamdelapoza@gmail.com.
(2)Iberoamerican Cochrane Center, Biomedical Research Institute Sant Pau (IIB 
Sant Pau), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)CIBER Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Via Roma Primary Care Center, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: One of several strategies developed to reduce inappropriate 
antibiotic use in situations where the indication is not clear is delayed 
antibiotic prescription (DAP), defined as an antibiotic prescription issued for 
the patient to take only in case of feeling worse or not feeling better several 
days after the visit. We conducted a survey to identify DAP use in Spanish 
primary care settings.
METHODS: We surveyed 23 healthcare centers located in 4 autonomous regions where 
a randomized controlled trial (RCT) on DAP was underway. The primary variable 
was use of DAP. Categorical and quantitative variables were analyzed by means of 
the chi-squared test and non-parametric tests, respectively.
RESULTS: The survey was sent to 375 healthcare professionals, 215 of whom 
responded (57.3% response rate), with 46% of these respondents declaring that 
they had used DAP in routine practice before the RCT started (66.6% afterwards), 
mostly (91.5%) for respiratory tract infections (RTIs), followed by urinary 
infections (45.1%). Regarding DAP use for RTIs, the most frequent conditions 
were pharyngotonsillitis (88.7%), acute bronchitis (62.7%), mild chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations (59.9%), sinusitis (51.4%), and 
acute otitis media (45.1%). Most respondents considered that DAP reduced 
emergency visits (85.4%), scheduled visits (79%) and inappropriate antibiotic 
use (73.7%) and most also perceived patients to be generally satisfied with the 
DAP approach (75.6%). Having participated or not in the DAP RCT (74.1% versus 
46.2%; p < 0.001), having previously used or not used DAP (86.8% versus 44.2%; 
p < 0.001), and being a physician versus being a nurse (81.8% versus 18.2%; 
p < 0.001) were factors that reflected significantly higher rates of DAP use.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of primary healthcare professionals in Spain do not 
use DAP. Those who use DAP believe that it reduces primary care visits and 
inappropriate antibiotic use, while maintaining patient satisfaction. Given the 
limited use of DAP in our setting, and given that its use is mainly limited to 
RTIs, DAP has considerable potential in terms of its implementation in routine 
practice.

DOI: 10.1186/s12875-019-0934-7
PMCID: PMC6434640
PMID: 30914044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Given that the questionnaire was completed by medical professionals who had been 
previously informed, by completing the questionnaire it was considered that 
their informed consent had been given. The protocol was approved by the Clinical 
Research Ethics Committee of the Jordi Gol University Institute for Primary Care 
Research (IDIAP). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


149. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jul 23;14:1639-1655. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S194019. eCollection 2019.

Prevalence and prognostic ability of the GOLD 2017 classification compared to 
the GOLD 2011 classification in a Norwegian COPD cohort.

Le LAK(1), Johannessen A(2)(3), Hardie JA(2), Johansen OE(4)(5), Gulsvik A(2), 
Vikse BE(1)(2), Bakke P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Haugesund Hospital, Haugesund, Norway.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Centre for International Health, Department of Global Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Department of Medicine, Bærum Hospital, Gjettum, Norway.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Norway KS, Asker, Norway.

RATIONALE: The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
2017 is based on an ABCD assessment tool of symptoms and exacerbation history 
and grade 1-4 of airflow limitation severity, facilitating classification either 
into 4 groups (ABCD) or 16 groups (1A-4D). We aimed to compare the GOLD 2011, 
GOLD 2017 ABCD, and GOLD 2017 1A-4D classifications in terms of their 
distribution and prediction of mortality and hospitalizations.
METHODS: In the GenKOLS study, 912 COPD patients with FEV1 less than 80% of the 
predicted answered questionnaires and performed lung function testing in 
2003-2005. The patients were recruited from a hospital patient registry (n=662) 
and from the general population (n=250), followed up until 2011 with respect to 
all-cause and respiratory mortality, and all-cause and respiratory 
hospitalizations. We performed logistic regression and receiver operating curve 
(ROC) analyses for the different classifications with estimations of area under 
the curve (AUC) for comparisons.
RESULTS: Mean age at baseline was 60 years (SD 11), 55% were male. Mean duration 
of follow-up was 91 months. By GOLD 2011, 21% were classified as group A, 29% 
group B, 6% group C, and 43% as group D, corresponding percentages for GOLD 2017 
were: 25%, 52%, 3%, and 20%. The GOLD 2011 classification had higher AUC values 
than the GOLD 2017 group ABCD classification for respiratory mortality and 
hospitalization, but after inclusion of airflow limitation severity in GOLD 2017 
groups 2A-4D, AUC values were significantly higher with GOLD 2017.
CONCLUSION: In a clinically relevant sample of COPD patients, the GOLD 2017 
classification doubles the prevalence of group B and halves the prevalence of 
groups C and D as compared to the GOLD 2011 classification. The prediction of 
respiratory mortality and respiratory hospitalization was better for GOLD 2017 
2A-4D taking airflow limitation severity into account, as compared to GOLD 2017 
ABCD and GOLD 2011.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S194019
PMCID: PMC6662162
PMID: 31413559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Jon Hardie reports personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, outside the submitted work. Dr Odd Erik Johansen is an employee of 
Boehringer Ingelheim. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


150. Pharmacoeconomics. 2019 May;37(5):689-699. doi: 10.1007/s40273-018-0756-9.

Doxycycline Added to Prednisolone in Outpatient-Treated Acute Exacerbations of 
COPD: A Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Alongside a Randomised Controlled Trial.

Finch AP(1), van Velzen P(2), Ter Riet G(3), Sterk PJ(2), Prins JM(4), Bosmans 
JE(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, VU 
University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
a.p.finch@vu.nl.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of General Practice, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Amsterdam 
UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, VU 
University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, Faculty of Earth and Life 
Sciences, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Most patients with mild to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) experience exacerbations, which are also associated with 
increased healthcare costs. Despite limited evidence of antibiotics' benefits 
for exacerbations in outpatients, antibiotics are frequently prescribed. The aim 
of this study was to investigate whether doxycycline added to prednisolone is 
cost-effective compared to placebo plus prednisolone for the treatment of COPD 
acute exacerbations.
METHODS: An economic evaluation from the societal perspective was performed 
alongside a 2-year randomised trial in 301 COPD patients in the Netherlands. The 
primary outcome was cost per quality-adjusted life year (QALY). The secondary 
outcome was cost per exacerbation prevented. Healthcare utilisation and loss of 
productivity were measured using retrospective questionnaires and clinical 
report forms. Missing data were imputed using multiple imputations by chained 
equations. Bootstrapping was employed to estimate statistical uncertainty 
surrounding cost-effectiveness outcomes. A sensitivity analysis from the 
healthcare perspective was performed.
RESULTS: On average, costs in the doxycycline group were €898 higher than in the 
placebo group [95% confidence interval (CI) - 2617 to 4409] for the 2 years of 
follow-up. QALY values were higher in the doxycycline group (0.03; 95% CI - 0.00 
to 0.06), but patients in this group suffered 0.01 more exacerbations than 
patients in the placebo group (95% CI - 0.14 to 0.11). Cost-effectiveness 
acceptability curves showed that the probability of doxycycline being 
cost-effective compared to placebo was 61% and 43% at a willingness-to-pay 
threshold of €34,000 per QALY and per exacerbation avoided, respectively. The 
sensitivity analysis showed similar results from the healthcare system 
perspective.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with mild to severe COPD treated for exacerbations in 
an outpatient setting, doxycycline added to prednisolone is not cost-effective 
compared to prednisolone plus placebo over a 2-year period.

DOI: 10.1007/s40273-018-0756-9
PMID: 30565022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Adv Ther. 2020 Jun;37(6):2956-2975. doi: 10.1007/s12325-020-01311-3. Epub 2020 
Apr 25.

Efficacy of Budesonide/Glycopyrronium/Formoterol Fumarate Metered Dose Inhaler 
(BGF MDI) Versus Other Inhaled Corticosteroid/Long-Acting Muscarinic 
Antagonist/Long-Acting β(2)-Agonist (ICS/LAMA/LABA) Triple Combinations in COPD: 
A Systematic Literature Review and Network Meta-analysis.

Ferguson GT(1), Darken P(2), Ballal S(2), Siddiqui MK(3), Singh B(3), Attri 
S(3), Holmgren U(4), de Nigris E(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA. garytferguson@msn.com.
(2)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(3)Parexel International, Punjab, India.
(4)AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Triple inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist/long-acting β2-agonist (ICS/LAMA/LABA) combination therapy is 
recommended for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who 
experience further exacerbations/symptoms on dual LAMA/LABA or ICS/LABA therapy. 
The relative efficacy of budesonide/glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate metered 
dose inhaler 320/18/9.6 µg (BGF MDI) in COPD was compared with other 
ICS/LAMA/LABA fixed-dose and open combination therapies in a network 
meta-analysis (NMA).
METHODS: A systematic literature review was conducted to identify randomized 
controlled trials of at least 10-week duration, including at least one 
fixed-dose or open combination triple therapy arm, in patients with moderate to 
very severe COPD. Studies were assessed for methodological quality and risk of 
bias. A three-level hierarchical Bayesian NMA model was used to determine the 
exacerbation rate per patient per year as well as the following outcomes at 
week 24: changes from baseline in pre-dose trough forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (FEV1), post-dose peak FEV1, and St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) total score; proportion of SGRQ responders; and Transition Dyspnea Index 
focal score. Change from baseline in rescue medication use over weeks 12-24 was 
also analyzed. Meta-regression and sensitivity analyses were used to assess 
heterogeneity across studies.
RESULTS: Eighteen studies (n = 29,232 patients) contributed to the NMA. ICS/LABA 
dual combinations were combined as a single treatment group to create a 
connected network. Across all outcomes, there were no statistically significant 
differences between BGF MDI and other triple ICS/LAMA/LABA fixed-dose 
(fluticasone furoate/umeclidinium/vilanterol and beclomethasone 
dipropionate/glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate) and open combinations with data 
available within the network. Results from sensitivity analyses and 
meta-regression were consistent with the base-case scenario.
CONCLUSION: This NMA suggested that BGF MDI has comparable efficacy to other 
ICS/LAMA/LABA fixed-dose and open triple combination therapies in reducing 
exacerbations and improving lung function and symptoms in patients with moderate 
to very severe COPD. Further research is warranted as additional evidence 
regarding triple therapies, especially fixed-dose combinations, becomes 
available.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-020-01311-3
PMID: 32335859


152. Adv Ther. 2019 Mar;36(3):495-519. doi: 10.1007/s12325-019-0893-3. Epub 2019 Feb 
11.

Fixed-Dose Combinations of Long-Acting Bronchodilators for the Management of 
COPD: Global and Asian Perspectives.

Rhee CK(1), Yoshisue H(2), Lad R(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Seoul St Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Novartis Pharma K.K., Tokyo, Japan. hajime.yoshisue@novartis.com.
(3)Novartis Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad, India.

Maintenance bronchodilator therapy with long-acting β-agonists (LABAs) and 
long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) is the cornerstone treatment for 
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Fixed-dose 
combinations (FDCs) of LABA/LAMA are recommended for the majority of symptomatic 
COPD patients by global guidelines; regional guidelines such as the Japanese and 
Korean guidelines also provide similar recommendations for the use of LABA/LAMA 
FDCs. This review comprehensively describes the latest clinical evidence from 
key studies on the efficacy and safety of four approved LABA/LAMA fixed-dose 
combinations: indacaterol/glycopyrronium, vilanterol/umeclidinium, 
formoterol/aclidinium, and olodaterol/tiotropium. Additionally, in this review 
we describe the rationale behind the use of LABA/LAMA FDC therapy, key findings 
from the preclinical and clinical trial evaluation of respective LABA and LAMA 
monocomponents, and the efficacy and safety of LABA/LAMA FDCs. Special emphasis 
is placed on the clinical evidence for the monocomponents and LABA/LAMA FDCs 
from the Asian population. This detailed overview of the efficacy and safety of 
LABA/LAMA FDCs in global and Asian COPD patients is envisaged to provide a 
better understanding of the benefits of these therapies and to inform healthcare 
providers and patients on their appropriate use.Funding: Novartis Pharma K.K.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-019-0893-3
PMCID: PMC6824447
PMID: 30742242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Pulm Ther. 2019 Jun;5(1):69-80. doi: 10.1007/s41030-019-0091-0. Epub 2019 Apr 1.

Patient-Reported Burden of Illness in a Prevalent COPD Population Treated with 
Long-Acting Muscarinic Antagonist Monotherapy: A Claims-Linked Patient Survey 
Study.

Hahn B(1), Stanford RH(2), Goolsby Hunter A(3), Essoi B(3), White J(3), Ray 
R(4).

Author information:
(1)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, 
NC, 27709-3398, USA. beth.a.hahn@gsk.com.
(2)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, 
NC, 27709-3398, USA.
(3)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum, 11000 Optum Circle, Eden 
Prairie, MN, 55344, USA.
(4)US Medical Affairs, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
27709-3398, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Symptom burden in inadequately controlled chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) considerably impacts quality of life, healthcare 
resource utilization (HCRU) and associated costs. This claims-linked 
cross-sectional survey study assessed symptom burden and HCRU among a prevalent 
population of COPD patients prescribed long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
monotherapy.
METHODS: Patients were identified using claims data from the Optum Research 
Database. Eligible patients were aged ≥ 40 years with 12 months' continuous 
enrollment in a US health plan, ≥ 2 medical claims containing COPD diagnosis 
codes ≥ 30 days apart, and ≥ 2 claims for LAMA monotherapy in the latter half of 
the 12-month sample identification period. Patients were mailed a 
cross-sectional survey assessing patient-reported outcomes (PROs) [COPD 
assessment test (CAT) and modified medical research council dyspnea scale 
(mMRC)], clinical characteristics, smoking history, and demographics. Patients 
also completed the Exacerbations of Chronic Pulmonary Disease Tool (EXACT-PRO) 
daily diary for 7 days. HCRU was assessed from claims data.
RESULTS: The study included 433 patients with a self-reported healthcare 
provider COPD diagnosis, and both claims-based and self-reported LAMA 
monotherapy treatment (mean age 71.0 years; 59.8% female). Most patients (85.5%) 
reported a high symptom burden (CAT score ≥ 10), 45.5% had high levels of 
dyspnea (mMRC grade ≥ 2), and 64.4% reported more severe daily symptoms by the 
EXACT-PRO. Most patients (71.6%) reported high scores on ≥ 2 PROs. More patients 
with high symptom burden had COPD-related emergency department visits than those 
with lower disease burden (27.6% vs 12.7%, P = 0.012).
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, a large proportion of patients with COPD receiving 
LAMA monotherapy experienced a high symptom burden and may benefit from therapy 
escalation. Healthcare professionals can use validated PROs to help them assess 
symptom burden.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline (GSK study number: 205862).

DOI: 10.1007/s41030-019-0091-0
PMCID: PMC6967076
PMID: 32026428


154. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 23;14:2979-2991. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S220850. eCollection 2019.

Efficacy and Safety of Budesonide/Glycopyrrolate/Formoterol Fumarate Metered 
Dose Inhaler Formulated Using Co-Suspension Delivery Technology in Japanese 
Patients with COPD: A Subgroup Analysis of the KRONOS Study.

Ichinose M(1), Fukushima Y(2), Inoue Y(3), Hataji O(4), Ferguson GT(5), Rabe 
KF(6), Hayashi N(7), Okada H(7), Takikawa M(7), Bourne E(8), Ballal S(9), 
DeAngelis K(10), Aurivillius M(11), Dorinsky P(8), Reisner C(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Fukuwa Clinic, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization, Kinki-Chuo Chest 
Medical Center, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Respiratory Center, Matsusaka Municipal Hospital, Matsusaka, Japan.
(5)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(6)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf and Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Airway 
Research Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Grosshansdorf, Germany.
(7)AstraZeneca K.K., Osaka, Japan.
(8)AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.
(9)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(10)Formerly of AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.
(11)AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: KRONOS, a Phase III, multicenter, randomized, double-blind study 
(NCT02497001) conducted in Canada, China, Japan, and the USA, assessed the 
efficacy and safety of budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered 
dose inhaler (BGF MDI), a triple fixed-dose combination therapy, relative to 
dual therapies in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD. Here we present 
findings from the Japanese subgroup of KRONOS.
METHODS: Patients received BGF MDI 320/18/9.6μg, glycopyrrolate/formoterol 
fumarate (GFF) MDI 18/9.6μg, budesonide/formoterol fumarate (BFF) MDI 320/9.6μg, 
or budesonide/formoterol fumarate dry powder inhaler (BUD/FORM DPI) 400/12μg 
twice-daily for 24 weeks. The primary endpoint was the change from baseline in 
morning pre-dose trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) over Weeks 12-24. 
Symptoms, quality of life, exacerbations, and safety were also assessed.
RESULTS: In total, 416 Japanese patients (21.9% of the global KRONOS population) 
were randomized and treated with BGF MDI (n=139), GFF MDI (n=138), BFF MDI 
(n=70), or BUD/FORM DPI (n=69). Nominally significant improvements in the change 
from baseline in morning pre-dose trough FEV1 over Weeks 12-24 were observed for 
BGF MDI vs GFF MDI (least squares mean [LSM] difference 37 mL, 95% confidence 
interval [CI] 3, 72; P=0.0337) and BFF MDI (67 mL; 95% CI 25, 109; P=0.0020). 
Treatment with BGF MDI led to a nominally significant reduction in the rate of 
moderate/severe exacerbations vs GFF MDI (rate ratio 0.40, 95% CI 0.19, 0.83; 
P=0.0142). Compared with dual therapies, numerical improvements were observed 
with BGF MDI for Transition Dyspnea Index focal score and the change from 
baseline in Evaluating Respiratory Symptoms in COPD total score (P≤0.3899). All 
treatments were generally well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: BGF MDI nominally significantly improved lung function and 
numerically improved symptoms vs GFF MDI and BFF MDI. BGF MDI nominally 
significantly reduced exacerbations vs GFF MDI in Japanese patients with COPD. 
Efficacy and safety findings were generally comparable to those in the global 
KRONOS population.

© 2019 Ichinose et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S220850
PMCID: PMC6939402
PMID: 31920295

Conflict of interest statement: MI reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, 
during the conduct of the study; and personal fees from Kyorin, Nippon 
Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novartis Pharma, outside of the submitted work. YI 
reports personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Nobelpharma, and Shionogi & Co., outside of the submitted work. OH reports 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novartis 
Pharma; and research funding from AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Kyorin Pharm, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis Pharma, and Ono Pharm. GTF 
reports grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from AstraZeneca during 
the conduct of the study; grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Pearl – a member of the AstraZeneca 
Group, and Sunovion; grants and personal fees from Theravance; and personal fees 
from Circassia, GlaxoSmithKline, Innoviva, Mylan, Sanofi, and Verona, outside of 
the submitted work. KFR reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Pharmaceuticals, InterMune, Novartis, Sanofi, 
Roche, and Teva; and grants from the Ministry of Education and Science, Germany, 
outside of the submitted work. NH, HO, and MT are employees of AstraZeneca K.K., 
Japan. EB, SB, MA, PD, and CR are employees of AstraZeneca. KdA is a former 
employee of AstraZeneca. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


155. Chest. 2020 May;157(5):1117-1129. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.12.006. Epub 2019 
Dec 28.

Comparative Safety and Effectiveness of Inhaled Corticosteroid and Long-Acting 
β(2)-Agonist Combinations in Patients With COPD.

Chang TY(1), Chien JY(2), Wu CH(3), Dong YH(4), Lin FJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Pharmacy, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(3)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Research Center for Pharmacoeconomics, College of Pharmacy, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Science, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Public Health, School of Medicine, 
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Graduate Institute of Clinical Pharmacy, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: fjilin@ntu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: The differential risk of pneumonia among inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS) use in patients with COPD requires more investigation, especially 
regarding beclomethasone-containing inhalers. The goal of this study was to 
compare the risk and benefit profile of different ICS/long-acting β2-agonist 
(LABA) combinations in patients with COPD.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study was conducted by using national health 
insurance claims data from the years 2009 to 2015 in Taiwan and included 
patients with COPD with new ICS/LABA use. Propensity score matching and Cox 
regression models were used to estimate the hazard ratios of severe pneumonia 
and acute exacerbation for different ICS/LABA users.
RESULTS: Both budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FOR) dry-powder inhalers and 
beclomethasone/formoterol (BEC/FOR) metered-dose inhalers, compared with 
fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FLU/SAL) delivered via the same device type, 
were associated with a lower risk of severe pneumonia (BUD/FOR hazard ratio 
[HR], 0.83 [95% CI, 0.70-0.98]; BEC/FOR HR, 0.69 [95% CI, 0.58-0.81]) and severe 
acute exacerbation (BUD/FOR HR, 0.88 [95% CI, 0.78-0.99]; BEC/FOR HR, 0.82 
[95% CI, 0.72-0.93]). After additionally adjusting for the average daily ICS 
dose, BUD/FOR dry-powder inhaler users continued to have a significantly 
decreased risk of severe pneumonia (18%), although BEC/FOR metered-dose inhaler 
users did not. The results were consistent in most of the prespecified subgroups 
and across all the sensitivity analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: This study augments the existing evidence concerning the different 
safety and effectiveness outcomes of ICS/LABA combinations in patients with 
COPD, which may be considered when making clinical treatment decisions.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.12.006
PMID: 31887282


156. Respir Med. 2019 Jul-Aug;154:12-17. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.05.022. Epub 2019 
May 29.

Triple inhaled therapy in COPD patients: determinants of prescription in primary 
care.

Vetrano DL(1), Zucchelli A(2), Bianchini E(3), Cricelli C(4), Piraino A(5), 
Zibellini M(5), Ricci A(6), Onder G(7), Lapi F(8).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Geriatrics, Catholic University of Rome and IRCCS Fondazione 
Policlinico "A. Gemelli", Rome, Italy; Aging Research Center, Department of 
Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm 
University, Sweden; Dept. of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of 
Brescia, Italy.
(2)Dept. of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, Italy.
(3)Health Search, Italian College of General Practitioners and Primary Care, 
Florence, Italy.
(4)Italian College of General Practitioners and Primary Care, Florence, Italy.
(5)Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A., Parma, Italy.
(6)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, S. Andrea Hospital-Sapienza 
University, Rome, Italy.
(7)Dept. of Geriatrics, Catholic University of Rome and IRCCS Fondazione 
Policlinico "A. Gemelli", Rome, Italy.
(8)Health Search, Italian College of General Practitioners and Primary Care, 
Florence, Italy. Electronic address: lapi.francesco@simg.it.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the incidence and determinants of the triple inhaled 
therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) primary care patients.
METHODS: Data derived from the Health Search Database (HSD) gathering 
information on 700 Italian general practitioners. A cohort of COPD patients, 
prescribed for the first time with inhaled treatments, was followed-up between 
January 2002 and December 2014. The outcome was the first incident prescription 
of a triple inhaled therapy, namely the combination of inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS), long-acting beta agonists (LABA), and long-acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMA). Cox regressions were used to test the association (hazard ratios, HR) 
between candidate determinants and the outcome.
RESULTS: Out of 17589 patients (mean age 71.1 ± 11.3 years; 37.4% females), 3693 
(21%) were prescribed with a triple inhaled therapy during follow-up. Older age 
(HR = 1.79 to 2.61), current and former smoking habit (HR = 1.72 and 1.66), 
higher GOLD stage (HR = 1.45 to 2.79), the number of moderate and severe COPD 
exacerbations (HR = 1.10 to 2.63), and heart failure (HR = 1.17) resulted 
statistically significantly associated with an increased incident prescription 
of the triple inhaled therapy. Female sex (HR = 0.80) and some comorbidities 
(HR = 0.21 to 0.87) resulted negatively associated with the outcome. 
Furthermore, patients initially treated with LAMA (HR = 1.5) and LABA/ICS 
(HR = 1.23) were more likely to escalate to the triple therapy, than those on 
LABA. Conversely, patients initially treated with ICS presented a negative 
hazard (HR = 0.72).
CONCLUSIONS: The knowledge of demographic and clinical determinants of the 
escalation to the triple inhaled therapy in real-world COPD patients may help 
clinicians to better personalize respiratory pharmacological treatments of their 
patients, and inform international societies that issue clinical guidelines.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.05.022
PMID: 31202120


157. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 3;14:2003-2013. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S210897. eCollection 2019.

Trends in prescriptions and costs of inhaled medications in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: a 19-year population-based study from Canada.

Tavakoli H(1), Johnson KM(1), FitzGerald JM(2), Sin DD(3), Gershon AS(4), 
Kendzerska T(5), Sadatsafavi M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Evaluation Sciences Program, Collaboration for Outcomes Research 
and Evaluation, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Institute for Heart and Lung Health, Department of Medicine, The University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation (the James Hogg Research Centre), St. Paul's 
Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Respirology, The Ottawa Hospital Research 
Institute/University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The patterns of medication use in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) may change over time due to the availability of new medications, 
updates in guideline-based recommendations, and changes in patient and care 
provider preferences.
OBJECTIVES: To document population-level trends of filled prescriptions and 
costs for major classes of inhaled COPD therapies.
METHOD: We used administrative health databases of the province of British 
Columbia, Canada, from 1997 to 2015, to create a retrospective cohort of COPD 
patients. We documented the percentage of patients receiving major inhaled 
COPD-related medications, including short-acting beta-2 adrenoreceptor agonists 
(SABA), long-acting beta-2 adrenoreceptor agonists (LABA), inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS), short-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (SAMA), and 
long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMA). We quantified the average, 
and relative annual change in, dispensed quantities and costs (in 2015 Canadian 
dollars [$]) of medications. Combination therapy was assessed as the proportion 
of time covered by two or more long-acting medications of different classes.
RESULTS: A total of 176,338 patients were included in the final cohort (mean age 
at entry 68.7, 48.5% female). In 2015, the most common medication was ICS (45.7% 
of the patients), followed by LABA (36.5%). LAMA was the least used medication 
(18.9%). The number of filled prescriptions per patient per year for LAMA (+7.8% 
per year) and LABA (+4.9%) increased, while they decreased for SAMA (-6.3%) and 
SABA (-3.8%), and remained relatively constant for ICS. The average annual 
per-patient costs of inhaled medications were $570.8 in 2015, which was double 
the costs from 1997. Single-inhaler ICS/LABA had the highest rate of increase 
(11.6% per year), and comprised 53.7% of the total costs of inhalers in 2015. In 
2015, 28.5% of the patient time was on combination therapies, with 7.1% on 
triple ICS/LABA/LAMA therapy.
CONCLUSION: Utilization of inhaled therapies for COPD has changed significantly 
over time. The low utilization of LAMA and high utilization of combination 
therapies (particularly those containing ICS) do not seem to be aligned with 
COPD treatment guidelines.

© 2019 Tavakoli et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S210897
PMCID: PMC6732655
PMID: 31564848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was funded by the Canadian 
Respiratory Research Network (CRRN). CRRN is supported by grants from the 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)-Institute of Circulatory and 
Respiratory Health, Canadian Lung Association (CLA)/Canadian Thoracic Society 
(CTS), British Columbia Lung Association, and Industry Partners 
Boehringer-Ingelheim Canada Ltd, AstraZeneca Canada Inc., and Novartis Canada 
Ltd. Funding for the training of postdoctoral students and new investigators 
within the network was supported by the above funding Sponsors and as well by 
GlaxoSmithKline Inc. Dr Sadatsafavi receives salary support from the Michael 
Smith Foundation for Health Research and the Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research and reports personal fees from GSK and grants from AstraZeneca Canada, 
outside the submitted work. None of the authors have declared any other actual 
or perceived conflicts of interest in this work.


158. J Psychosom Res. 2019 Mar;118:18-26. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2019.01.002. Epub 
2019 Jan 7.

Symptoms of anxiety and depression and use of anxiolytic-hypnotics and 
antidepressants in current and former smokers with and without COPD - A cross 
sectional analysis of the COPDGene cohort.

Iyer AS(1), Holm KE(2), Bhatt SP(3), Kim V(4), Kinney GL(5), Wamboldt FS(6), 
Jacobs MR(4), Regan EA(7), Armstrong HF(8), Lowe KE(5), Martinez CH(9), 
Dransfield MT(10), Foreman MG(11), Shinozaki G(12), Hanania NA(13), Wise RA(14), 
Make BJ(15), Hoth KF(16); COPDGene Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; Lung Health 
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; Health 
Services, Outcomes, and Effectiveness Research Training Program, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. Electronic address: aiyer@uabmc.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA; Department 
of Community and Behavioral Health, Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora, 
CO, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; Lung Health 
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(4)Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Temple University School of 
Medicine Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, University of 
Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA; Department 
of Psychiatry, University of Colorado School of Medicine at the Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA; Department 
of Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, University of Colorado, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.
(9)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.
(10)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; Lung Health 
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(11)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Morehouse School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA, USA; Iowa Neuroscience Institute, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(13)Division of Pulmonary/Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(14)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(15)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(16)Department of Psychiatry, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA, USA; Iowa Neuroscience Institute, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care, 
and Sleep Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, 
IA, USA. Electronic address: karin-hoth@uiowa.edu.

OBJECTIVES: To compare the frequency of anxiety/depressive symptoms and use of 
anxiolytic-hypnotics/antidepressants in smokers with and without COPD and to 
identify characteristics associated with having unmedicated symptoms.
METHODS: Cross-sectional analysis of ambulatory, current/former smokers ≥10 pack 
years enrolled in the COPDGene study. We measured anxiety/depressive symptoms 
using the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (subscales ≥8), recorded 
anxiolytic-hypnotic/antidepressant use, and defined unmedicated symptoms as 
elevated anxiety/depressive symptoms and not on medications. Regression analysis 
identified characteristics associated with having unmedicated symptoms.
KEY RESULTS: Of 5331 current/former smokers (45% with and 55% without COPD), 
1332 (25.0%) had anxiety/depressive symptoms. Anxiety symptoms were similar in 
frequency in smokers with and without COPD (19.7% overall), while depressive 
symptoms were most frequent in severe-very severe COPD at 20.7% (13.1% overall). 
In the entire cohort, 1135 (21.2%) were on medications. Anxiolytic-hypnotic use 
was highest in severe-very severe COPD (range 7.6%-12.0%), while antidepressant 
use showed no significant variation in smokers with and without COPD (range 
14.7%-17.1%). Overall, 881 (66% of those with symptoms) had unmedicated 
symptoms, which was associated with African American race (adjusted OR 2.95, 95% 
CI 2.25-3.87), male gender (adjusted OR 1.93, 95% CI 1.57-2.36), no health 
insurance (adjusted OR 2.38, 95% CI 1.30-4.35), severe-very severe COPD 
(adjusted OR 1.48, 95% CI 1.04-2.11), and higher respiratory 
symptoms/exacerbation history (adjusted OR 2.21, 95% CI 1.62-3.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Significant unmet mental health care needs exist in current and 
former smokers with and without COPD. One in five have unmedicated symptoms, 
identified by key demographic and clinical characteristics.
PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: National Institutes of Health and The COPD Foundation.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2019.01.002
PMCID: PMC6383809
PMID: 30782350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Respirology. 2019 Oct;24(10):972-979. doi: 10.1111/resp.13559. Epub 2019 Apr 30.

Real-life effectiveness of inhaler device switch from dry powder inhalers to 
pressurized metred-dose inhalers in patients with asthma treated with ICS/LABA.

Park HS(1), Yoon D(2), Lee HY(3), Ban GY(4), Wan Yau Ming S(5), Jie JLZ(5), 
Carter V(5), Hardjojo A(5), Van Boven JFM(6), Price DB(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Ajou University Medical 
Center, Suwon, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Ajou University School of Medicine, 
Suwon, Korea.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Ajou University Medical Center, Suwon, Korea.
(4)Department of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Kangdong Sacred 
Heart Hospital, Hallym University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute, Singapore.
(6)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Groningen Research 
Institute for Asthma and COPD (GRIAC), University Medical Centre Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(7)Centre of Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, 
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

Comment in
    Respirology. 2019 Oct;24(10):924-925.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Mixed inhaler device use for asthma is associated with 
worse inhaler technique and outcomes. Given that relievers are commonly 
prescribed as pressurized metred-dose inhalers (pMDI), changing preventers from 
dry powder inhalers (DPI) to pMDI may improve asthma outcomes. This study aimed 
to assess the persistence and effectiveness of switching from DPI to pMDI for 
inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting β2 -agonist combination therapy 
(ICS/LABA).
METHODS: This was a historical cohort study using Ajou University Hospital 
(Korea) patient records. Persistence of switch was defined as receiving ≥1 pMDI 
and no DPI after the switch. Effectiveness of switch was assessed as the 
proportion without severe asthma exacerbation and the proportion achieving risk 
domain asthma control (RDAC; no asthma-related hospitalization, antibiotics 
without upper respiratory diagnosis or acute course of oral corticosteroids) and 
overall asthma control (OAC; RDAC and ≤ 200 μg salbutamol/≤500 μg terbutaline 
average daily dose) comparing 1 year after and before the switch.
RESULTS: Within 85 patients who switched from DPI to pMDI and persisted for a 
year, higher proportion were free from asthma exacerbation after the switch 
(mean difference in proportion = 0.129, 95% CI: 0.038-0.220). Switching to pMDI 
was also associated with better RDAC (75.3% vs 57.7%, P = 0.001) and OAC (57.7% 
vs 45.9%, P = 0.021). From the entire 117 patients who switched to fixed-dose 
combination (FDC)/ICS LABA pMDI, 76.1% (95% CI: 69.0-100.0%) patients persisted 
in the following 6 months.
CONCLUSION: Switching to and persisting with pMDI was associated with decreased 
asthma exacerbations and improved asthma control. The majority of patients 
persisted with the switch to pMDI for ICS/LABA treatment.

© 2019 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13559
PMID: 31038269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Neurology. 2019 Jul 9;93(2):e135-e142. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007694. Epub 
2019 May 24.

Use of β2-adrenoreceptor agonist and antagonist drugs and risk of Parkinson 
disease.

Hopfner F(1), Wod M(1), Höglinger GU(1), Blaabjerg M(1), Rösler TW(1), 
Kuhlenbäumer G(1), Christensen K(1), Deuschl G(1), Pottegård A(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy (F.H.), 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Germany; Department of Neurology (F.H., 
G.K., G.D.), UKSH, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Germany; Unit of 
Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Biodemography (M.W., K.C.), Danish Twin Registry 
(M.W., K.C.), Danish Aging Research Center (M.W., K.C.), and Department of 
Clinical Research (M.B.) and Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy (A.P.), 
Department of Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, Odense; Department 
of Neurology (G.U.H.), Hannover Medical School, Germany; Department of Neurology 
(G.U.H., T.W.R.), Technical University of Munich; German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (G.U.H., T.W.R.); Munich Cluster for Systems 
Neurology (G.U.H., T.W.R.), Germany; and Departments of Neurology (M.B.), 
Clinical Genetics (K.C.), and Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology (K.C.), 
Odense University Hospital, Denmark.
(2)From the Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy (F.H.), 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Germany; Department of Neurology (F.H., 
G.K., G.D.), UKSH, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Germany; Unit of 
Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Biodemography (M.W., K.C.), Danish Twin Registry 
(M.W., K.C.), Danish Aging Research Center (M.W., K.C.), and Department of 
Clinical Research (M.B.) and Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy (A.P.), 
Department of Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, Odense; Department 
of Neurology (G.U.H.), Hannover Medical School, Germany; Department of Neurology 
(G.U.H., T.W.R.), Technical University of Munich; German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (G.U.H., T.W.R.); Munich Cluster for Systems 
Neurology (G.U.H., T.W.R.), Germany; and Departments of Neurology (M.B.), 
Clinical Genetics (K.C.), and Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology (K.C.), 
Odense University Hospital, Denmark. apottegaard@health.sdu.dk.

OBJECTIVE: To verify the previously reported association between long-term use 
of β2-adrenoreceptor (β2AR) agonist and antagonist with reduced and increased 
risk of Parkinson disease (PD), respectively.
METHODS: We obtained odds ratios (ORs) associating time of β2AR agonist and 
antagonist use with PD risk in nationwide Danish health registries.
RESULTS: We included 2,790 patients with PD and 11,160 controls. Long-term β2AR 
agonist use was associated with reduced PD risk (OR 0.57, 95% confidence 
interval [CI] 0.40-0.82) in this cohort. Unexpectedly, short-term β2AR agonist 
use was equally associated (OR 0.64, 95% CI 0.42-0.98). Because β2AR agonists 
are prescribed mostly for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), often 
caused by long-term nicotine abuse, we analyzed other markers of smoking. 
Diagnosis of COPD (OR 0.51, 95% CI 0.37-0.69) and use of inhaled corticosteroids 
(OR 0.78, 95% CI 0.59-1.02) or inhaled anticholinergics (OR 0.41, 95% CI 
0.25-0.67) were also inversely associated with PD. Increased PD risk was not 
found for all β2AR antagonists but only for propranolol and metoprolol. 
Associations were markedly stronger for short-term than long-term use.
CONCLUSION: We confirmed β2AR agonist use to be associated with reduced PD risk 
and β2AR antagonist use with increased PD risk. However, our data indicate the 
association of β2AR agonists to be indirectly mediated by smoking, which is 
repeatedly associated with reduced risk of PD. The association of β2AR 
antagonists indicates reverse causation, with PD symptoms triggering their 
prescription rather than β2AR antagonists causing PD. Thus, current 
epidemiologic data do not support a causal link between β2AR agonists and 
antagonists and PD risk.

© 2019 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007694
PMID: 31127070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Br J Gen Pract. 2019 Jan;69(678):e1-e7. doi: 10.3399/bjgp18X700385. Epub 2018 
Dec 17.

Inaccurate diagnosis of COPD: the Welsh National COPD Audit.

Fisk M(1), McMillan V(2), Brown J(3), Holzhauer-Barrie J(2), Khan MS(2), Baxter 
N(4), Roberts CM(5).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Medicine and Immunotherapeutics (EMIT) Department, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge.
(2)National COPD Audit Programme.
(3)Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust and UCL Respiratory, Division of 
Medicine, University College London, London.
(4)National COPD Audit Programme Primary Care Workstream, Royal College of 
Physicians, London.
(5)National COPD Audit Programme; associate director, Clinical Effectiveness and 
Evaluation Unit, Care Quality Improvement Department, Royal College of 
Physicians, London.

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is 
confirmed with spirometry demonstrating persistent airflow obstruction.
AIM: To evaluate the clinical characteristics and management of patients in 
primary care on COPD registers with spirometry incompatible with COPD.
DESIGN AND SETTING: A primary care audit of Welsh COPD Read-Coded patient data 
from the Quality and Outcomes Framework (QOF) COPD register in Wales.
METHOD: Patients on the QOF COPD register with incompatible spirometry 
(post-bronchodilator forced expiratory lung volume in 1 second/forced vital 
capacity [FEV1/FVC] ratio ≥0.70) were compared with those with compatible 
spirometry (FEV1/FVC <0.70).
RESULTS: This audit included 63% of Welsh practices contributing 48 105 
patients. Only 19% (n = 8957) of patients were post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC 
Read-Coded and were included in this study. Of these, 75% (n = 6702) had 
compatible spirometry and 25% (n = 2255) did not. Patients with incompatible 
spirometry were more likely female (P = 0.009), never-smokers (P<0.001), had 
higher body mass index (P<0.001), and better mean FEV1 (P<0.001). Medical 
Research Council (MRC) breathlessness scores, exacerbation frequency, and asthma 
co-diagnosis were similar between groups. Patients in both groups were just as 
likely to receive inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and long-acting beta-agonists 
(LABAs), but patients with incompatible spirometry were less likely to receive 
long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) (P<0.001) or LABA/ICS (P = 0.002) 
combinations.
CONCLUSION: Patients on the COPD QOF register with spirometry incompatible with 
COPD are symptomatic and managed using significant resources. If quality of care 
and effective resource use are to be improved, focus must be given to correct 
diagnosis in this group.

© British Journal of General Practice 2019.

DOI: 10.3399/bjgp18X700385
PMCID: PMC6301368
PMID: 30559109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Eur J Intern Med. 2019 Mar;61:62-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2018.10.018. Epub 2018 
Oct 31.

Validation of the BAP-65 score for prediction of in-hospital death or use of 
mechanical ventilation in patients presenting to the emergency department with 
an acute exacerbation of COPD: a retrospective multi-center study from the 
Italian Society of Emergency Medicine (SIMEU).

Germini F(1), Veronese G(2), Marcucci M(3), Coen D(2), Ardemagni D(4), Montano 
N(5), Fabbri A(6); SIMEU Study Group.

Collaborators: Adinolfi LE(7), Alvisi A(8), Antonio P(9), Azin G(10), Balloni 
A(11), Bandiera G(12), Barchetti M(13), Barillari A(14), Barozzi M(15), Belloni 
G(16), Belotti E(17), Binetti N(18), Bonora M(19), Bruni R(20), Cacco S(21), 
Camisa D(21), Carbone G(22), Carpinteri G(23), Catino L(24), Cazzaniga M(25), 
Cenni P(26), Chelli V(27), Cicero L(15), Cottone CD(28), Cuccia F(19), D'Angelo 
L(25), Dalmonte F(26), Daviddi F(29), De Vita A(7), Famà F(30), Fedele M(18), 
Fonti C(22), Frigerio M(11), Gallingani A(13), Ghiglione V(31), Gioffrè-Florio 
M(30), Giordano M(7), Giostra F(11), Galli MG(32), Greggi ME(28), Groff P(33), 
Guizzardi S(34), Lagasio C(31), Lazzara G(34), Lubini E(14), Magni L(35), 
Mancarella S(36), Mangano G(23), Maragno M(19), Menabue M(37), Meoni E(29), 
Molinaro F(22), Morelli A(38), Moscariello F(39), Nevola R(7), Noto P(23), 
Paladino F(40), Pancani R(41), Petrelli G(33), Petrino R(42), Sinno C(19), Tafa 
A(27), Tartaglia S(42), Taurino C(41), Treleani M(39), Villari L(41), Vitelli 
A(40), Zaccagni C(36), Zaccaro B(19), Zacchino M(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact (formerly 
Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics), McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, 
Canada; Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, 
Italy; Emergency Department, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: federicogermini@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda Ca' 
Granda, Università di Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact (formerly 
Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics), McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, 
Canada.
(4)Geriatric Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milan, Italy; Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Università 
degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(5)Emergency Department, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milan, Italy; Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, 
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Emergency Medicine, Ospedale Morgagni-Pierantoni, Forlì, Italy.
(7)Università della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, 
Chirurgiche, Neurologiche, Metaboliche e dell'Invecchiamento, Ospedale 
Clinicizzato di Marcianise, Marcianise (CE), Italy.
(8)Pronto Soccorso e Medicina D'urgenza, Ospedale Civile di Vignola AUSL, 
Modena, Italy.
(9)U.O.C Ps-OBI A.O.R.N A, Cardarelli di Napoli, Italy.
(10)Dipartimento di Scienza della Salute, Università degli studi di Milano 
Bicocca, Italy.
(11)Pronto Soccorso Ospedale A. Murri, Fermo, Italy.
(12)Pronto Soccorso OCSAE-Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Policlinico OCSAE, 
Modena, Italy.
(13)Nuovo Ospedale di Sassuolo, Modena, Italy.
(14)Pronto Soccorso, AAS2 Bassa Friulana-Isontina, Ospedale di Monfalcone (Go), 
Italy.
(15)U.O. Medicina d'Urgenza-Pronto Soccorso, Presidio Ospedaliero 
"Bufalini-Marconi-Angiloni", Cesena, Italy.
(16)Geriatria, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milano, Italy.
(17)Emergenza Alta Specializzazione (Pronto soccorso), ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII 
di Bergamo, Italy.
(18)Unità Operativa di Pronto Soccorso ed Emergenza territoriale, Area Nord 
Bologna, Italy.
(19)Pronto Soccorso e Medicina d'Urgenza, Ospedale Madonna delle Grazie, Matera, 
Italy.
(20)Pronto Soccorso ospedale San Martino, Belluno, Italy.
(21)Pronto Soccorso, ASST Melegnano e Martesana, Presidio di Vizzolo Predabissi, 
Milano, Italy.
(22)S.C. di Medicina e Chirurgia d'Urgenza e Accettazione, Humanitas 
"Gradenigo", Torino, Italy.
(23)Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Policlinico Vittorio Emanuele, Catania, 
Italy.
(24)Università degli Studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(25)Pronto Soccorso, Ospedale A. Manzoni, Azienda Ospedaliera di Lecco, Lecco, 
Italy.
(26)Pronto Soccorso e Medicina d'Urgenza, Ospedale di Imola (BO), Italy.
(27)Dipartimento di Emergenza e Accettazione, Presidio Grosseto, Azienda Usl 
Toscana sud est, Italy.
(28)Responsabile PS, Ospedale di Petralia Sottana (PA), Italy.
(29)Medicina d'Accettazione e d'Urgenza P.O. Pescia (PT), Italy.
(30)Human Pathology Department, University Hospital "G. Martino" of Messina, 
Messina, (Italy).
(31)Pronto Soccorso, Ospedale S. Paolo, Savona, ASL 2, Liguria, Italy.
(32)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, Università degli Studi di 
Parma, Parma, Italy.
(33)UO Pronto Soccorso e Medicina d'Urgenza, Ospedale "Madonna del Soccorso", 
San Benedetto del Tronto, Italy.
(34)Pronto Soccorso, Ospedali riuniti Padova Sud Madre Teresa di Calcutta, 
Azienda ULSS 6 Euganea, Schiavonia, Padova, Italy.
(35)Pronto Soccorso, ASST di Vimercate, Ospedale di Vimercate (MB), Italy.
(36)Pronto Soccorso, Ospedale Bassini, Cinisello Balsamo, ASST-Nord Milano, 
Italy.
(37)Pronto Soccorso e Medicina D'urgenza, Ospedale Civile di Vignola, AUSL, 
Modena, Italy.
(38)Pronto Soccorso, Medicina D'Urgenza e 118-Ospedale Morgagni-Pierantoni di 
Forlì, Italy.
(39)Pronto soccorso e medicina d'urgenza Pordenone, Italy.
(40)U.O.C Ps-OBI A.O.R.N A. Cardarelli di Napoli, Italy.
(41)Medicina e Chirurgia d'accettazione e d'urgenza Azienda USL Toscana 
Nordovest, Italy.
(42)Medicina e Chirurgia d'Accettazione ed Urgenza (MeCAU)-Pronto Soccorso, 
Ospedale S. Andrea, Vercelli, Italy.

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPDE) frequently 
require hospitalizations, may necessitate of invasive mechanical ventilation 
(IMV), and are associated with a remarkable in-hospital mortality. The BAP-65 
score is a risk assessment model (RAM) based on simple variables, that has been 
proposed for the prediction of these adverse outcomes in patients with COPDE. If 
showed to be accurate, the BAP-65 RAM might be used to guide the patients 
management, in terms of destination and treatment. We conducted a retrospective, 
multicentre, chart-review study, on patients attending the ED for a COPDE during 
2014. The aim of the study was the validation of the BAP-65 RAM for the 
prediction of in-hospital death or use of IMV (composite primary outcome). We 
assessed the discrimination and the prognostic performance of the BAP-65 RAM. We 
enrolled 2908 patients from 20 centres across Italy. The mean (standard 
deviation) age was 76 (11) years, and 38% of patients were female. The composite 
outcome occurred in 5.3% of patients. The AUROC of BAP-65 for the composite 
outcome was 0.64 (95%CI 0.59-0.68). The sensitivity of BAP-65 score ≥ 4 to 
predict in-hospital mortality was 44% (95% CI 34%-55%), the specificity was 84% 
(95% CI 82%-85%), the positive predictive value was 9% (95% CI 6%-12%), and the 
negative predictive value was 98% (95% CI 97%-98%). CONCLUSIONS: In patients 
attending Italian EDs with a COPDE, we found that the BAP-65 score did not have 
sufficient accuracy to stratify patients upon their risk of severe in-hospital 
outcomes.

Copyright © 2018 European Federation of Internal Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2018.10.018
PMID: 30391167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Br J Pharmacol. 2020 Mar;177(5):1150-1163. doi: 10.1111/bph.14909. Epub 2020 Jan 
29.

Beclomethasone dipropionate, formoterol fumarate and glycopyrronium bromide: 
Synergy of triple combination therapy on human airway smooth muscle ex vivo.

Rogliani P(1), Matera MG(2), Facciolo F(3), Page C(4), Cazzola M(1), Calzetta 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(2)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(3)Thoracic Surgery Unit, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.
(4)Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Science, King's College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Combining inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs), long-acting β2 
-adrenoceptor agonists (LABAs) and long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) is 
recommended to treat severe forms of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). Clinical benefits have been demonstrated for ICS/LABA/LAMA 
combinations. This study characterized the interaction between the ICS 
beclomethasone dipropionate, the LABA formoterol fumarate and the LAMA 
glycopyrronium bromide in human airways.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Human passively sensitized airways and bronchi from COPD 
donors were stimulated with histamine or carbachol. Tissues were incubated 
overnight with beclomethasone and then treated with formoterol and 
glycopyrronium, alone or in triple combination. The interaction was assessed by 
using Bliss Independence and Unified Theory theorems.
KEY RESULTS: Beclomethasone/formoterol/glycopyrronium combination 
synergistically relaxed medium bronchi and small airways. 
Beclomethasone/formoterol/glycopyrronium combination at 100:6:12.5 combination 
ratio was a balanced drug mixture leading to very strong synergistic effect on 
relaxation of medium bronchi (Combination Index: from 0.042 to 0.96) and middle 
to very strong synergy in small airways (Combination Index: from 0.018 to 
0.310). The synergy was related with the activation of intracellular 
glucocorticoid receptors and Gsα subunit G-protein of β2 -adrenoceptors, leading 
to the modulation of cyclic AMP-dependent PKA pathway.
CONCLUSION: Triple beclomethasone/formoterol/glycopyrronium combination induces 
synergistic bronchorelaxant effect in medium and small human airways, at least 
in ex vivo experiments. Further research is needed to confirm these findings in 
clinical studies in patients with asthma or COPD.

© 2019 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.14909
PMCID: PMC7042115
PMID: 31660611

Conflict of interest statement: P.R. participated as a lecturer, speaker and 
advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, 
AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Group, Mundipharma, and Novartis. Her department was 
funded by Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Zambon, and Chiesi 
Farmaceutici. M.G.M. has participated as a lecturer, speaker and advisor in 
scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis and has 
been a consultant to Chiesi Farmaceutici. F.F. has no conflict of interest to 
declare. C.P. has acted as a Consultant for Recipharma, ImmunoRegulation, PrEP 
Biopharma, Ockham Biosciences and Eurodrug. C.P. also owns equity in Verona 
Pharma who are developing novel drugs for the treatment of respiratory diseases. 
M.C. has participated as a lecturer, speaker and advisor in scientific meetings 
and courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Biofutura, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Group, 
Lallemand, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Verona Pharma, and Zambon and has been 
a consultant to ABC Farmaceutici, Recipharm, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Lallemand, 
Novartis, Verona Pharma, and Zambon. His department was funded by Almirall, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Zambon. L.C. has participated as advisor in 
scientific meetings under the sponsorship of Boehringer Ingelheim and Novartis, 
received non‐financial support by AstraZeneca, received a research grant 
partially funded by Chiesi Farmaceutici, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and 
Almirall and is or has been a consultant to ABC Farmaceutici, Recipharm, Zambon, 
Verona Pharma, and Ockham Biotech. His department was funded by Almirall, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Zambon, and Chiesi Farmaceutici.


164. Pneumologie. 2019 Jun;73(6):340-346. doi: 10.1055/a-0851-5269. Epub 2019 Mar 20.

[Prescriptions for Asthma and COPD in Germany for the Years 2007, 2010, 2013, 
2015 - 2017].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Hausen T.

Numbers of prescriptions of the most important substances/combinations for the 
treatment of asthma and COPD have been extracted out of the sum of all 
prescriptions of a statistically relevant number of family physicians, internal 
medicine specialists and pneumologists and analysed.Prescriptions of inhalation 
drugs showed an increase and those of oral drugs a decrease in therapy of asthma 
and COPD over a period of 10 years.With asthma there was a clear increase in the 
prescription of anti-inflammatory substances and a decrease in that of 
short-acting bronchodilators. There was an increase in prescriptions of 
short-acting beta agonists in relation to prescriptions of short-acting 
muscarine antagonists and short-acting beta agonists/short-acting muscarine 
antagonists, which showed a decrease. For the therapy of COPD, there was a clear 
increase in the prescription of long-acting bronchodilators and a very slight 
tendency towards a decrease of ICS-containing drugs. This decrease was so slight 
that we still have to fear extensive overuse of ICS in COPD. Prescriptions of 
short-acting bronchodilators increased minimally, and whereas there was an 
increase in prescriptions of short-acting beta-agonists, there was a decrease in 
short-acting muscarine antagonists and short-acting beta agonists/short-acting 
muscarine antagonists.

Publisher: Aus den Verordnungszahlen einer statistisch relevanten Zahl von 
Hausärzten, Internisten und Pneumologen wurden die Zahlen der wichtigsten 
Substanzen/Substanzkombinationen für die Therapie bei Asthma und COPD extrahiert 
und analysiert.Die Verordnungszahlen über 10 Jahre belegen eine Zunahme von 
Präparaten mit inhalativer Applikationsform und eine Abnahme oral zu 
applizierender Präparate bei der Therapie von Asthma und COPD.Beim Asthma ist 
eine deutliche Zunahme antientzündlicher Pharmaka bei gleichzeitiger Abnahme von 
kurzwirksamen Beta-Agonisten zu beobachten. Die Verordnungen von kurzwirksamen 
Beta-Agonisten nehmen im Verhältnis zu und die von kurzwirksamen 
Muscarin-Antagonisten und kurzwirksamen Beta-Agonisten/kurzwirksamen 
Muscarin-Antagonisten ab.Bei der COPD belegen die Verordnungszahlen eine 
deutliche Zunahme für langwirksame Bronchodilatatoren und eine leichte Tendenz 
zur Abnahme von ICS-haltigen Präparaten. Letztere fällt aber so gering aus, dass 
unverändert eine erhebliche Übertherapie mit ICS bei der COPD zu befürchten ist. 
Die Verordnungen von kurzwirksamen Bronchodilatatoren steigen leicht an zu 
Ungunsten von kurzwirksamen Beta-Agonisten, und es gibt einen Rückgang von 
Verordnungen von kurzwirksamen Muscarin-Antagonisten und kurzwirksamen 
Beta-Agonisten/kurzwirksamen Muscarin-Antagonisten.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0851-5269
PMID: 30895590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T. Hausen hat ein Beraterhonorar von Novartis 
erhalten.


165. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2019 Oct 23;6(4):321-31. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.6.4.2019.0137.

Nebulized Versus Dry Powder Long-Acting Muscarinic Antagonist Bronchodilators in 
Patients With COPD and Suboptimal Peak Inspiratory Flow Rate.

Mahler DA(1), Ohar JA(2), Barnes CN(3), Moran EJ(3), Pendyala S(3), Crater 
GD(3).

Author information:
(1)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire and 
Respiratory Services, Valley Regional Hospital, Claremont, New Hampshire.
(2)Wake Forest University Medical Center, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
(3)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, California.

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and 
suboptimal peak inspiratory flow rate (sPIFR) may not benefit optimally from dry 
powder inhalers (DPI) because of inadequate inspiratory flow. Nebulized 
bronchodilators may provide a better alternative. We compared bronchodilation 
with the long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) revefenacin for nebulization 
versus the DPI LAMA tiotropium, in patients with COPD and sPIFR (< 60 L/min 
against the resistance of Diskus®).
METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, 28-day Phase 3b 
study in patients with COPD enrolled based on sPIFR. The primary endpoint was 
trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) on Day 29 for revefenacin for 
nebulization versus tiotropium HandiHaler® DPI.
RESULTS: We enrolled 206 patients with mean (standard deviation) age, 65 (8) 
years; percent predicted FEV1, 37 (16)%; PIFR, 45 (12) L/min. In the 
intent-to-treat (ITT) population, revefenacin improved trough FEV1 from 
baseline; however, the difference versus tiotropium was not significant (least 
squares [LS] mean difference [standard error], 17.0 [22.4] mL, P=0.4461). In a 
prespecified analysis of patients with FEV1 < 50% predicted, revefenacin 
produced an LS mean difference (95% confidence interval [CI]), 49.1 (6.3-91.9) 
mL in trough FEV1 and 103.5 (7.7-199.3) mL in forced vital capacity versus 
tiotropium. Revefenacin produced >100 mL increase in FEV1 in 41.6% versus 34.4% 
of patients with tiotropium in ITT and 41.4% versus 25.7% of patients in FEV1 < 
50% predicted populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Revefenacin did not produce significant improvements in FEV1 versus 
tiotropium in the ITT population, but increased trough FEV1 in patients with 
FEV1 < 50% predicted and sPIFR. Clinical Trial Registration 
(www.Clinicaltrials.gov): Study 0149 (NCT03095456).

JCOPDF © 2019.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.6.4.2019.0137
PMCID: PMC7006701
PMID: 31647854

Conflict of interest statement: DAM has served on advisory boards for 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline plc, Grifols SA, Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals Inc., Theravance Biopharma, Inc., and Trevi and is on the 
speaker’s bureau for AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals Inc. JAO has served on advisory boards for AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline plc, Mylan Inc, Reckitt Benckiser Group 
plc, Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., and Theravance Biopharma, Inc. EJM and GDC 
are employees of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. CNB and SP were employees of 
Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. at the time this study was conducted.


166. Ann Pharmacother. 2019 Mar;53(3):285-293. doi: 10.1177/1060028018798753. Epub 
2018 Sep 1.

Glycopyrrolate/eFlow CS: The First Nebulized Long-Acting Muscarinic Antagonist 
Approved to Treat Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Pleasants RA 2nd(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Duke Clinical Research Institute and Durham Veterans Administration Medical 
Center, Durham, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, efficacy, and safety of the first 
nebulized long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), glycopyrrolate (GLY)/eFlow 
closed system (CS) nebulizer, approved for maintenance treatment of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
DATA SOURCES: A PubMed search was conducted (January 2000 to July 2018) using 
the following terms/phrases: nebulized glycopyrrolate, inhalation devices in 
COPD, long-acting muscarinic antagonists COPD, and COPD survey. Retrieved 
articles were reviewed to identify additional references.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Primary and review articles on GLY/eFlow CS 
and other treatment options for patients with COPD were selected.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Guidelines recommend the use of LAMAs, alone or in combination 
with long-acting β2-agonists, as maintenance therapy for the majority of 
patients with COPD. With the range of different devices and bronchodilators now 
available, treatment can be tailored based on individual needs. The eFlow CS 
nebulizer delivers GLY rapidly over a 2- to 3-minute period and provides 
bronchodilation within 30 minutes, lasting 12 hours. Phase 2 dose-finding and 
phase 3 studies demonstrated sustained statistically significant and clinically 
important improvements in pulmonary function and patient-reported outcomes with 
GLY/eFlow CS. Relevance to Patient Care and Clinical Practice: GLY/eFlow CS 
provides a novel, portable, efficient, and rapid drug delivery system.
CONCLUSIONS: The recently approved GLY/eFlow CS drug-device combination provides 
a viable treatment option for patients with COPD, particularly those with 
conditions that may impair proper use of traditional handheld inhalers.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028018798753
PMCID: PMC6357169
PMID: 30175596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author 
declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Dr Pleasants has 
received grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, and Teva, speaker 
fees from Astra-Zeneca and Sunovion, and consultant fees from Teva and 
Glaxo-SmithKline.


167. Arch Bronconeumol. 2020 Feb;56(2):106-113. doi: 10.1016/j.arbres.2019.09.023. 
Epub 2019 Nov 22.

Incorporating New Evidence on Inhaled Medications in COPD. The Latin American 
Chest Association (ALAT) 2019.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Montes de Oca M(1), López Varela MV(2), Acuña A(3), Schiavi E(4), Casas A(5), 
Tokumoto A(6), Torres Duque CA(4), Ramírez-Venegas A(7), García G(8), Camelier 
A(9), Bergna M(10), Cohen M(11), Sanchez-Angarita E(3), Guzmán S(12), Czischke 
K(13), Barros M(14), Rey A(2).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Universitario de Caracas, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, 
Venezuela. Electronic address: montesdeoca.maria@gmail.com.
(2)Universidad de la República, Hospital Maciel, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(3)Hospital Universitario de Caracas, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, 
Venezuela; Departamento de Investigación y Estadística, ITSalud/Medsolid, 
Caracas, Venezuela.
(4)SubSecretaría de Planificación Sanitaria, Ministerio de Salud, Gobierno de la 
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Fundación Neumológica Colombiana, Bogotá, Colombia.
(6)Hospital Central Fuerza Aérea del Perú, Lima, Perú.
(7)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Ciudad de México, México.
(8)Hospital Rodolfo Rossi, La Plata, Argentina.
(9)Universidade do Estado da Bahia e Escola Bahiana de Medicina, Salvador, 
Brasil.
(10)Hospital Dr. Antonio Cetrángolo, Vicente López, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(11)Hospital Centro Médico, Guatemala, Guatemala.
(12)Hospital José Gregorio Hernández, Caracas, Venezuela.
(13)Clínica Alemana de Santiago, Hospital Padre Hurtado, Universidad del 
Desarrollo, San Ramón, Región Metropolitana, Chile.
(14)Escuela de Medicina, Universidad de Valparaíso, Hospital C. Van Buren, 
Valparaíso, Región de Valparaíso, Chile.

This document on COPD from the Latin American Chest Association (ALAT-2019) uses 
PICO methodology to analyze new evidence on inhaled medication and answer 
clinical questions. The following key points emerged from this analysis: 1) 
evidence is lacking on the comparison of short-acting vs. long-acting 
bronchodilators in patients with mild COPD; patients with moderate-to-severe 
COPD obtain greater benefit from long-acting bronchodilators; 2) the benefits of 
monotherapy with long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA) and combined therapy 
with long-acting β2-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids (LABA/ICS) are similar, 
although the latter is associated with a greater risk of pneumonia; 3) LABA/LAMA 
offer greater benefits in terms of lung function and risk of exacerbation than 
LABA/ICS (the latter involve an increased risk of pneumonia), 4) LAMA/LABA/ICS 
have greater therapeutic benefits than LABA/LAMA on the risk of moderate-severe 
exacerbations. With regard to the role of eosinophils in guiding the use of ICS, 
ICS withdrawal must be considered when the initial indication was wrong or no 
response is elicited, in patients with side effects such as pneumonia, and in 
patients with a low risk of exacerbation and an eosinophil blood count of <300 
cells/μl. All this evidence, categorized according to the severity of the 
obstruction, symptoms, and risk of exacerbations, has been used to generate an 
algorithm for the use of inhaled medication in COPD.

Copyright © 2019 SEPAR. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arbres.2019.09.023
PMID: 31767208


168. Einstein (Sao Paulo). 2019 Dec 9;18:eAO4706. doi: 
10.31744/einstein_journal/2020AO4706. eCollection 2020.

Evaluating the disease and treatment information provided to patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at the time of discharge according to GOLD 
discharge guidelines.

Morais LA(1), Cavalcante SYIES(2), Conde MB(3), Rabahi MF(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal de Goiás , Goiânia , GO , Brazil .
(2)Universidade Estadual de Goiás , Anápolis , GO , Brazil .
(3)Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro , Rio de Janeiro , RJ , Brazil .

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the disease and treatment information provided to 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at hospital discharge.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study including hospitalized patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at three tertiary hospitals. The study was 
based on seven items of the Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) discharge guidelines. Two hospitals in this study had a Medical Residency 
Program in Pulmonology, and one did not have the program.
RESULTS: Fifty-four patients were evaluated. Large amounts of information were 
provided concerning effective pharmacological maintenance (item 1), blood gas 
evaluation/measurement of oxygen saturation (item 2), assessment of inhalation 
technique (item 4), and maintenance therapy (item 5). Less information was 
provided regarding comorbidity management planning (item 3), the completion of 
antibiotic/corticosteroid therapy (item 6) and follow-up with the attending 
physician or specialist (item 7) had less information. We observed significant 
differences between hospitals for items 1, 4 and 7, and better performance in 
hospitals with medical residency in pulmonology.
CONCLUSION: Hospitalized patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
received little to no information about the seven items addressed by GOLD 
discharge guidelines. This finding suggests that these guidelines should be used 
more often by clinicians in hospital with or without medical residency in 
pulmonology. The lack of specialized care resulted in insufficient amount of 
information for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at 
discharge.

OBJETIVO: Avaliar informações sobre a doença e o tratamento fornecidos a 
pacientes com doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica no momento da alta hospitalar.
MÉTODOS: Estudo transversal incluindo pacientes internados com doença pulmonar 
obstrutiva crônica de três hospitais terciários. O estudo baseou-se em sete 
itens das diretrizes de alta hospitalar da Global Initiative for Obstructive 
Lung Disease (GOLD). Dois hospitais participantes deste estudo tinham um 
Programa de Residência Médica em Pneumologia, e o terceiro não tinha.
RESULTADOS: Foram avaliados 54 pacientes. Muitas informações foram fornecidas em 
relação à manutenção farmacológica efetiva (item 1), avaliação de 
gasometria/medida da saturação de oxigênio (item 2), avaliação da técnica de 
inalação (item 4) e terapia de manutenção (item 5). Foram fornecidas menos 
informações em relação ao planejamento do manejo de comorbidade (item 3), a 
realização de antibioticoterapia/corticoterapia (item 6) e seguimento com o 
médico assistente ou especialista (item 7). Observaram-se diferenças 
significativas entre os hospitais para os itens 1, 4 e 7, e melhor desempenho 
nos hospitais com Programa de Residência Médica em Pneumologia.
CONCLUSÃO: Pacientes hospitalizados com doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica 
receberam pouca ou nenhuma informação relacionada aos sete itens abordados pelas 
diretrizes da GOLD para alta. Esses achados sugerem que essas diretrizes 
deveriam ser utilizadas com maior frequência por clínicos em hospitais com ou 
sem Programa Residência Médica em Pneumologia. A falta de atendimento 
especializado resultou em informação insuficiente para pacientes com doença 
pulmonar obstrutiva crônica na alta hospitalar.

DOI: 10.31744/einstein_journal/2020AO4706
PMCID: PMC6905159
PMID: 31826076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none.


169. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Apr 11;14:799-808. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S198288. eCollection 2019.

Relationship of inhaled long-acting bronchodilators with cardiovascular outcomes 
among patients with stable COPD: a meta-analysis and systematic review of 43 
randomized trials.

Li C(1), Cheng W(2), Guo J(1), Guan W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory, Affiliated Hospital of Qinghai University, Xining, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Qinghai University, Xining, 
People's Republic of China.

Background: Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) and long-acting 
β2-agonists (LABAs) are the mainstay of maintenance therapy for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Although previous studies have supported 
inhaled long-acting bronchodilators (ILABs) for overall cardiovascular safety, 
the risk of specific cardiovascular outcomes such as arrhythmia, heart failure 
and stroke is still unknown. Materials and methods: We systematically searched 
from PubMed, the Embase database and the Cochrane Library for published studies 
on ILABs and COPD, from its inception to November 10, 2018, with no language 
restrictions. The RRs and corresponding 95% CIs were pooled to evaluate 
ILAB/placebo. Results: Finally, 43 randomized controlled trials were included. 
Compared with placebo, ILABs do not increase the risk of overall and specific 
cardiovascular adverse events (AEs); on the contrary, they can reduce the 
incidence of hypertension (RR 0.73, 95% CI 0.55-0.98;I219.9%; P= 0.221). 
However, when stratified according to the specific agents of ILABs, olodaterol 
might reduce the risk of overall cardiovascular adverse events (OCAEs) (RR 0.65, 
95% CI 0.49-0.88;I227.5%; P= 0.000), and the protective effect of lowing blood 
pressure disappeared. Similarly, the use of inhaled LABA might increase the risk 
of cardiac failure (RR 1.71, 95% CI 1.04-2.84;I20%; P= 0.538), but this risk 
disappeared when stratified according to the specific agents of LABA. Besides, 
formoterol might decrease the risk of cardiac ischemia (RR 0.53, 95% CI 
0.32-0.91; I20%; P= 0.676). Conclusions: Overall, the use of ILABs was not 
associated with overall cardiovascular AEs in patients with stable COPD. When 
stratified according to the specific agents of LABA, olodaterol might reduce the 
risk of OCAE; and formoterol might decrease the risk of cardiac ischemia. LABA 
might reduce the incidence of hypertension, but might increase the risk of heart 
failure. Therefore, COPD patients with a history of heart failure should use it 
with caution.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S198288
PMCID: PMC6489598
PMID: 31114181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


170. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2019 Oct;123(4):335-344. doi: 
10.1016/j.anai.2019.07.021. Epub 2019 Jul 31.

Management of asthma COPD overlap.

Maselli DJ(1), Hanania NA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Diseases & Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Texas Health at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas.
(2)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. Electronic address: 
hanania@bcm.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To review the latest literature on management approaches to patients 
with asthma chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap (ACO).
DATA SOURCES: Studies and reports were identified from the databases of 
PubMed/Medline and ClinicalTrials.gov from the US National Institutes of Health 
and the Cochrane Register of Controlled Trials.
STUDY SELECTIONS: Studies on the management of asthma, COPD, and ACO were 
included in this review.
RESULTS: Patients with asthma COPD overlap tend to have greater morbidity than 
those with asthma or COPD alone, but the information on the best therapeutic 
approach to this group of patients is still limited. Current treatment 
recommendations rely on expert opinions, roundtable discussions, and strategy 
documents, because most clinical studies in asthma and COPD have excluded 
patients with ACO. Because of the potential risk described in patients with 
asthma with the use of long-acting 2 agonist monotherapy, initial therapy for 
patients with ACO is recommended to include a long-acting bronchodilator in 
conjunction with inhaled corticosteroids. Long-acting muscarinic antagonists are 
effective in both asthma and COPD and should be considered in ACO as an add-on 
treatment. If inhaler therapy is not effective, advanced therapies based on 
phenotyping and identification of treatable traits may be considered.
CONCLUSION: Few studies have evaluated prospectively therapies in the ACO 
population, and future studies need to determine best strategies for the 
treatment of these patients, focusing on targeting its different phenotypes and 
its treatable traits.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anai.2019.07.021
PMID: 31376487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 23;14:2185-2193. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S216059. eCollection 2019.

A Framework For Step Down Or Therapeutic Re-Organization For Withdrawal Of 
Inhaled Corticosteroids In Selected Patients With COPD: A Proposal For COPD 
Management.

Micheletto C(1), Braido F(2), Contoli M(3), Di Marco F(4), Santus P(5).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Respiratory Diseases and Allergy Clinic, 
University of Genova, Azienda Policlinico IRCCS San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Respiratory 
Unit, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy.
(5)Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano,Pulmonary 
Unit, Luigi Sacco University Hospital, ASST Fatebenefratelli, Milan, Italy.

While chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) continues to be a major cause 
of morbidity and mortality, pharmacological therapy has a definite benefit on 
symptoms as well as the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and general 
health. The most recent Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
guidelines recommend triple therapy (long-acting beta2 agonists [LABA] + 
long-acting muscarinic antagonists [LAMA] + inhaled corticosteroids [ICS]) only 
for patients with exacerbations, elevated eosinophils, and without control using 
a LABA/LAMA or ICS/LABA combination. Long-term monotherapy with ICS is not 
currently recommended, but may be considered in association with LABAs in 
patients with a history of exacerbations and elevated eosinophils in spite of 
appropriate treatment with long-acting bronchodilators. However, long-term use 
of ICS in combination therapy has been associated with adverse effects, even if 
widely used in routine management for decades. The available evidence suggests 
that ICS can be rationally discontinued in patients with stable disease and is 
not likely to have unfavorable effects on lung function, overall health, or be 
associated with a greater risk of exacerbations. Indeed, it is widely accepted 
that ICS therapy should be limited to a small proportion of patients after 
careful assessment of the individual risk-benefit profile. Unfortunately, 
however, there are no international recommendations that provide specific 
guidance or a protocol for withdrawal of ICS. Herein, the available evidence on 
the use of ICS is reviewed and an easy to use tool is proposed that can provide 
clinicians with a simple management scheme to guide the most appropriate therapy 
for management of COPD and use of ICS. In management of COPD, a highly 
personalized approach is advocated so that the most appropriate therapy for each 
individual patient can be selected.

© 2019 Micheletto et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S216059
PMCID: PMC6765263
PMID: 31576115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Claudio Micheletto reports personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, GSK, Menarini, Guidotti, Berlin Chemie, Novartis, Zambom, and 
Boehringer Ingelheim, outside the submitted work. Marco Contoli reports grants 
and personal fees from AstraZeneca and Chiesi, and personal fees from 
ALK-Abello, Novartis, Zambon, GlaxoSmithKline, and Boehringer Ingelheim, outside 
the submitted work. Fabiano Di Marco reports grants, personal fees, and 
non-financial support from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Novartis, 
Menarini, Malesci, Guidotti, TEVA, and Zambon, outside the submitted work. 
Pierachille Santus reports grants and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim 
and AstraZeneca, grants from Chiesi Farmaceutici and Almirall, and personal fees 
from ALK-Abello, Berlin Chemie, GSK, Sanofi, and Zambon Italia, during the 
conduct of the study. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


172. Pulm Ther. 2019 Dec;5(2):191-200. doi: 10.1007/s41030-019-00099-0. Epub 2019 Aug 
6.

Classification of Patients with COPD on LAMA Monotherapy Using the GOLD 
Criteria: Analysis of a Claims-Linked Patient Survey Study.

Ray R(1), Hahn B(2), Stanford RH(3), White J(4), Essoi B(4), Hunter AG(4).

Author information:
(1)US Medical Affairs, GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(2)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. 
beth.a.hahn@gsk.com.
(3)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(4)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum, Eden Prairie, MN, USA.

INTRODUCTION: To address the burden of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
recommends treatment according to classification of patients by symptom severity 
and exacerbation risk. This post hoc analysis of a previously reported 
claims-linked, cross-sectional survey [study 205862 (HO-16-16642)] classified 
patients with COPD receiving long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) 
monotherapy based on the GOLD 2017 categories.
METHODS: Eligible patients who were ≥ 40 years of age, with ≥ 2 claims with 
International Classification of Diseases-10th Revision-Clinical Modification 
COPD diagnosis codes J40-J44 ≥ 30 days apart during the 12-month baseline 
period, and ≥ 2 claims for LAMA monotherapy in the 6 months prior to 
identification, were identified using claims data from the Optum Research 
Database. Patients completed a survey assessing modified Medical Research 
Council (mMRC) Dyspnea Scale and COPD Assessment Test (CAT) scores and 
demographics; clinical characteristics were assessed from claims and survey 
data, while exacerbation history was assessed from claims data. GOLD symptom 
severity classifications were low (groups A and C) for patients with low scores 
on both the CAT and mMRC scales (scores of < 10 and 0-1, respectively), and high 
(groups B and D) for patients with high scores on either scale (scores of ≥ 10 
and 2-4, respectively).
RESULTS: Of 433 patients included, 85.5% reported a CAT total score ≥ 10, and 
45.5% reported mMRC grades 2-4. During the baseline period, 63.7% of patients 
had ≤ 1 moderate and 0 severe (hospitalized) exacerbations, and 36.3% had ≥ 1 
severe or ≥ 2 moderate exacerbation(s). The proportions of patients with each 
GOLD classification were: A: 9.0%; B: 54.7%; C: 4.6%; D: 31.6%.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population, over 85% of LAMA monotherapy users have 
symptoms and/or exacerbation risk that may necessitate therapy escalation 
according to 2017 GOLD guidelines.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline [study 205862 (HO-16-16642)].

DOI: 10.1007/s41030-019-00099-0
PMCID: PMC6967324
PMID: 32026409


173. Respir Res. 2019 Aug 7;20(1):178. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1130-y.

Evaluation of exacerbations and blood eosinophils in UK and US COPD populations.

Vogelmeier CF(1), Kostikas K(2), Fang J(3), Tian H(4), Jones B(5), Morgan CL(5), 
Fogel R(3), Gutzwiller FS(6), Cao H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Centre Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-University Marburg, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 35043, Marburg, Germany. 
vogelmei@med.uni-marburg.de.
(2)Respiratory Medicine Department, University of Ioannina School of Medicine, 
Ioannina, Greece.
(3)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(4)KMK Consulting Inc, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(5)Pharmatelligence, Cardiff, UK.
(6)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Blood eosinophil counts and history of exacerbations have been 
proposed as predictors of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) who may benefit from triple therapy (inhaled corticosteroid, long-acting 
β2-agonist and long-acting muscarinic antagonist).
METHODS: In a retrospective cohort analysis we examined the profiles of COPD 
patients from the UK Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD) and US Optum 
Clinformatics™ Data Mart (Optum) databases with reference to exacerbation 
frequency and blood eosinophil distribution.
RESULTS: Of the 31,437 (CPRD) and 383,825 (Optum) patients with COPD, 15,364 
(CPRD) and 139,465 (Optum) met the eligibility criteria and were included. Among 
patients with ≥2 exacerbations and available eosinophil counts in the baseline 
period (CPRD, n = 3089 and Optum, n = 13414), 17.0 and 13.3% respectively had 
eosinophil counts ≥400 cells/μL. Patients with ≥2 exacerbations or eosinophil 
count ≥400 cells/μL during first year, exacerbated at least once (CPRD, 82.8% vs 
Optum, 80.6%) or continued to have eosinophil count ≥300 cells/μL (76.8% vs 
76.5%), respectively in the follow-up year. In both years, a higher variability 
in the number of exacerbations and eosinophil count was observed in patients 
with one exacerbation and eosinophil counts between 300 and 400 cells/μL; 
patients with eosinophil count < 150 cells/μL had the lowest variability. 
Approximately 10% patients had both ≥2 exacerbations and eosinophil count ≥300 
cells/μL across the databases.
CONCLUSION: A high variability in blood eosinophil counts over two consecutive 
years was observed in UK and US patients with COPD and should be considered 
while making treatment decisions. A small proportion of COPD patients had 
frequent exacerbations and eosinophil count ≥300 cells/μL.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1130-y
PMCID: PMC6686508
PMID: 31391053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CFV reports research support from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Novartis, Bayer Schering, MSD, 
Pfizer, consultancy from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, CSL Behring, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Menarini, Novartis, Teva, Cipla, and honoraria from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, CSL Behring, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, 
Menarini, Mundipharma, Novartis, Teva, Cipla. KK was an employee of Novartis 
Pharma AG at the time of the conduct of this study. JF is an employee of 
Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation owning stocks through the employment. HT is 
employee of KMK Consulting Inc. and providing consulting to Novartis, the 
sponsor of the study. BJ is an employee of Pharmatelligence who received funding 
from Novartis to conduct analyses for this study. CM is a consultant of 
Pharmatelligence who received funding from Novartis to conduct analyses for this 
study. RF is an employee of Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation owning stocks 
through the employment. FSG is an employee of Novartis Pharma AG owning stocks 
through the employment. HC is an employee of Novartis Pharmaceuticals 
Corporation owning stocks through the employment.


174. Chron Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;16:1479972318775422. doi: 
10.1177/1479972318775422. Epub 2018 May 9.

Depression is a major determinant of both disease-specific and generic 
health-related quality of life in people with severe COPD.

Jang SM(1)(2), Kim KU(1)(2), Na HJ(1)(2), Song SE(1)(2), Lee SH(3), Lee H(4), 
Kim YS(1), Lee MK(1)(2), Park HK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Pusan National 
University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(2)2 Medical Research Institute, Pusan National University Hospital, Busan, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)3 Department of Internal Medicine, Sanbon Hospital, Wonkwang University, 
Gunpo, Republic of Korea.
(4)4 Department of Nursing, College of Nursing, Pusan National University, 
Yangsan, Republic of Korea.

The quality of life of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) decreases significantly as the disease progresses; those with severe COPD 
are affected most. This article investigates predictors of the disease-specific 
and generic health-related quality of life (HRQL) in patients with severe COPD. 
This multicentre prospective cross-sectional study enrolled 80 patients with 
severe COPD. At enrolment, all patients completed a disease-specific instrument, 
the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), and a generic instrument, the 
Short Form 36 Health Survey Questionnaire (SF-36). The data were analyzed by 
Pearson's correlation and multiple linear regression. The mean age of the 
patients was 66 ± 8 years; 93% were males. The SGRQ and SF-36 scores were not 
influenced by age or sex. Depression, dyspnea, the number of exacerbations, and 
exercise capacity significantly predicted the total SGRQ score ( p < 0.05). 
Depression was the strongest determinant of the total SGRQ score. The SF-36 
physical component summary scores were related to depression, dyspnea, and the 
number of exacerbations ( p < 0.05). In comparison, the SF-36 mental component 
summary scores were related to depression and anxiety ( p < 0.05). Depression is 
a significant determinant of both the disease-specific and generic HRQL in 
patients with severe COPD. Screening and early intervention for depression in 
patients with severe COPD could improve the HRQL.

DOI: 10.1177/1479972318775422
PMCID: PMC6302962
PMID: 29742914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


175. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2020 Feb;13(2):103-113. doi: 
10.1080/17512433.2020.1717334. Epub 2020 Jan 29.

Aclidinium bromide and formoterol fumarate for the maintenance treatment of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Haley R(1), Gupta N(2), Sethi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Swedish Hospital, Chicago, IL, USA.

Introduction: Treatment options for COPD have evolved rapidly in the last decade 
and inhaled bronchodilators have largely supplanted the use of oral 
bronchodilators because of their increased efficacy and excellent safety with 
topical delivery to the lung. Recently added to the therapeutic armamentarium 
are fixed-dose combinations (FDC) of two long acting bronchodilators. LAMAs 
(long acting muscarinic antagonists) and LABAs (long acting beta agonists) are 
the main classes available and use different pathways to effectively produce 
bronchial smooth muscle relaxation.Areas covered: The most recent inhaled FDC 
LAMA/LABA to come to market is Aclidinium Bromide and Formoterol Fumarate. We 
searched databases of PubMed, Cochrane Library, and manufacturers' websites and 
retrieved all the randomized-controlled trials (RCTs) conducted with these drugs 
up to September 2019.Expert opinion: It is likely that FDCs will become the core 
of our COPD pharmacotherapy for all but the mildest COPD patients. These 
individual drugs have excellent efficacy and safety records for the maintenance 
treatment of COPD. Studies have demonstrated that twice daily treatment with 
aclidinium/formoterol resulted in significant improvement in lung function and 
an improved exercise tolerance when compared to placebo. Adverse effects are 
within the range of what is seen with other LAMA/LABA combinations.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2020.1717334
PMID: 31951778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Asthma. 2020 Mar;57(3):241-252. doi: 10.1080/02770903.2019.1565828. Epub 2019 
Jan 18.

Asthma in the older adult.

Nanda A(1)(2), Baptist AP(3), Divekar R(4), Parikh N(5), Seggev JS(6), Yusin 
JS(7)(8), Nyenhuis SM(9).

Author information:
(1)Asthma and Allergy Center, Lewisville and Flower Mound, TX, USA.
(2)Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of Michigan School of 
Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Capital Allergy and Respiratory Disease Center, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Roseman University College of Medicine, Las 
Vegas, NV, USA.
(7)Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(9)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Objective: The older adult population is increasing worldwide, and a significant 
percentage has asthma. This review will discuss the challenges to diagnosis and 
management of asthma in older adults. Data Sources: PubMed was searched for 
multiple terms in various combinations, including asthma, older adult, elderly, 
comorbid conditions, asthma diagnosis, asthma treatment, biologics and 
medication side effects, and adverse events. From the search, the data sources 
that were utilized included peer reviewed scholarly review articles, peer 
reviewed scientific research articles, and peer reviewed book chapters. Study 
Selections: Study selections that were utilized included peer reviewed scholarly 
review articles, peer reviewed scientific research articles, and peer reviewed 
book chapters. Results: Asthma in older adults is frequently underdiagnosed and 
has higher morbidity and mortality rates compared to their younger counterparts. 
A detailed history and physical examination as well as judicious testing are 
essential to establish the asthma diagnosis and exclude alternative ones. 
Medical comorbidities, such as cardiovascular disease, cognitive impairment, 
depression, arthritis, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), rhinitis, and 
sinusitis are common in this population and should also be assessed and treated. 
Non-pharmacologic management, including asthma education on inhaler technique 
and self-monitoring, is vital. Pharmacologic management includes standard asthma 
therapies such as inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), inhaled corticosteroid-long 
acting β-agonist combinations (ICS-LABA), leukotriene antagonists, long acting 
muscarinic antagonists (LAMA), and short acting bronchodilators (SABA). Newly 
approved biologic agents may also be utilized. Older adults are more vulnerable 
to polypharmacy and medication adverse events, and this should be taken into 
account when selecting the appropriate asthma treatment. Conclusions: The 
diagnosis and management of asthma in older adults has certain challenges, but 
if the clinician is aware of them, the morbidity and mortality of this condition 
can be improved in this growing population.

DOI: 10.1080/02770903.2019.1565828
PMID: 30656998


177. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2020 Feb 7;77(4):259-268. doi: 10.1093/ajhp/zxz306.

Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A review focusing on 
exacerbations.

Bollmeier SG(1), Hartmann AP(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Ambulatory Care Pharmacy, St. Louis College of Pharmacy, St. 
Louis, MO.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, MO.

PURPOSE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a significant cause of 
morbidity and mortality in the United States. Exacerbations- acute worsening of 
COPD symptoms-can be mild to severe in nature. Increased healthcare resource use 
is common among patients with frequent exacerbations, and exacerbations are a 
major cause of the high 30-day hospital readmission rates associated with COPD.
SUMMARY: This review provides a concise overview of the literature regarding the 
impact of COPD exacerbations on both the patient and the healthcare system, the 
recommendations for pharmacologic management of COPD, and the strategies 
employed to improve patient care and reduce hospitalizations and readmissions. 
COPD exacerbations significantly impact patients' health-related quality of life 
and disease progression; healthcare costs associated with severe 
exacerbation-related hospitalization range from $7,000 to $39,200. Timely and 
appropriate maintenance pharmacotherapy, particularly dual bronchodilators for 
maximizing bronchodilation, can significantly reduce exacerbations in patients 
with COPD. Additionally, multidisciplinary disease-management programs include 
pulmonary rehabilitation, follow-up appointments, aftercare, inhaler training, 
and patient education that can reduce hospitalizations and readmissions for 
patients with COPD.
CONCLUSION: Maximizing bronchodilation by the appropriate use of maintenance 
therapy, together with multidisciplinary disease-management and patient 
education programs, offers opportunities to reduce exacerbations, 
hospitalizations, and readmissions for patients with COPD.

© American Society of Health-System Pharmacists 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/ajhp/zxz306
PMCID: PMC7005599
PMID: 31930287


178. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 4;14:361-369. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S189384. eCollection 2019.

Longitudinal change of FEV(1) and inspiratory capacity: clinical implication and 
relevance to exacerbation risk in patients with COPD.

Jo YS(1), Kim SK(2), Park SJ(3), Um SJ(4), Park YB(5), Jung KS(6), Kim DK(7), 
Yoo KH(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Kyung Hee University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonology, St Vincent's 
Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Chonbuk National University Medical School, 
Jeonju, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonology, Dong-A University 
Hospital, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical 
Care Medicine, Hallym University Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Hallym 
University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University Medical School, Anyang, 
Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul Metropolitan Government, Seoul 
National University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Allergy Medicine, 
Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea, khyou@kuh.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: FEV1 is the gold standard for assessment of COPD. We 
compared efficacy of FEV1, inspiratory capacity (IC), and IC to total lung 
capacity (TLC) ratio in the evaluation of COPD and their association with 
exacerbation.
METHODS: We analyzed the association of dyspnea severity, quality of life 
status, and lung function with lung function measurements and exacerbation risk 
in 982 patients enrolled in the Korea COPD Subgroup Registry and Subtype 
Research study. Exacerbation and longitudinal lung function change were 
evaluated in 3 years' follow-up.
RESULTS: The FEV1, IC, and IC to TLC ratio showed comparable negative 
correlations with dyspnea severity and quality of life status, and positive 
correlation with exercise capacity. In patients with >2 events/year, annual rate 
of change in FEV1 and IC tended to decline more rapidly in those with FEV1 <50% 
than in those with FEV1 >50% (-14.46±19.40 mL/year vs 12.29±9.24 mL/year, 
P=0.213; -4.75±17.28 mL/year vs -78.05±34.16 mL/year, P=0.056 for FEV1 and IC, 
respectively), without significance.
CONCLUSION: Longitudinal changes in IC and FEV1 were not significantly 
associated with exacerbation risk.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S189384
PMCID: PMC6366360
PMID: 30787605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


179. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2019 Jan;144(1):15-20. doi: 10.1055/a-0570-3595. Epub 2019 
Jan 2.

[The stepwise approach of COPD therapy].

[Article in German]

Watz H, Kirsten A, Greulich T.

The goal of pharmacologic therapy of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) is to reduce symptoms, improve exercise intolerance and 
health-related quality of life, and to reduce exacerbations. Inhaled long-acting 
β2-agonists (LABAs) and long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) are equally 
effective for the symptomatic management of COPD. However, LAMAs are more 
effective than LABAs in the reduction of exacerbations. In patients with 
symptomatic COPD pharmacologic therapy is usually escalated using the fixed 
combination of LAMAs and LABAs (dual bronchodilation), which is also superior to 
LAMA monotherapy in the prevention of exacerbations. Adding inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) to LABA and LAMA (triple therapy) for a prevention of 
exacerbations results in a further reduction of exacerbations, especially in 
those patients with higher blood eosinophil counts. Non-pharmacologic management 
of COPD patients includes smoking cessation programs, vaccination, pulmonary 
rehabilitation, and strategies to improve or maintain their physical activity.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0570-3595
PMID: 30602182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Henrik Watz: Honorare für Vorträge und Beratung 
sowie Reisekostenunterstützung von AstraZeneca, Bayer, BerlinChemie, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Menarini, Takeda, Roche.Anne Kirsten: 
Honorare für Vorträge und Beratung von AstraZeneca Boehringer Ingelheim.Timm 
Greulich: Honorare für Vorträge, Beratertätigkeiten oder Reiseunterstützung von 
AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, CSL-Behring, Grifols, 
GSK, Mundipharma, Novartis, StreamedUp.


180. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2019 Feb;28(2):126-133. doi: 10.1002/pds.4448. Epub 
2018 May 8.

GOLD assessment of COPD severity in the Clinical Practice Research Datalink 
(CPRD).

Rebordosa C(1), Plana E(1), Aguado J(1), Thomas S(2), García-Gil E(3), 
Perez-Gutthann S(1), Castellsague J(1).

Author information:
(1)RTI Health Solutions, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)RTI Health Solutions, Research Triangle Park, NC, Raleigh, USA.
(3)AstraZeneca, Barcelona, Spain.

PURPOSE: To evaluate availability of spirometry and symptom data in the Clinical 
Practice Research Datalink (United Kingdom) to assess COPD severity using the 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2016 definition 
and comparing it with an algorithm used in other studies.
METHODS: This was a descriptive, noninterventional, secondary database cohort 
study of patients with COPD aged 40 years or older, who initiated treatment with 
specific COPD medications. Patients were classified according to COPD severity 
(1) in GOLD 2016 "ABCD" categories based on symptoms (Medical Research Council 
dyspnea grade, COPD Assessment Test, breathlessness), percent predicted FEV1, 
and exacerbation history and (2) as mild, moderate, severe, or very severe based 
on treatment and exacerbation history.
RESULTS: The study included 63 900 patients with COPD aged 40 years or older 
that were new users of 1 or more COPD medication of interest. Percent predicted 
FEV1 was available for 80.9% of patients; symptoms for 75.6% of patients. 
Classification into GOLD 2016 ABCD categories was possible for 75.6% of the 
patients. The GOLD 2016 ABCD definition classified more patients under the 
high-risk categories (22.1%, A; 18.8%, B; 21.3%, C; 37.9%, D) than did the 
adapted algorithm (7.9%, mild; 48.6%, moderate; 42.1%, severe; 1.4%, very 
severe).
CONCLUSION: Using our adaptation of the GOLD 2016 COPD severity classification, 
the information in the Clinical Practice Research Datalink allowed us to 
ascertain COPD severity in approximately 75% of patients with COPD. Algorithms 
that include medication use tend to misclassify patients with the extreme COPD 
severity categories.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.4448
PMID: 29740896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2019 Jan;25(1):58-69. doi: 10.18553/jmcp.2019.25.1.058.

External Validation of a COPD Risk Measure in a Commercial and Medicare 
Population: The COPD Treatment Ratio.

Stanford RH(1), Lau MS(1), Li Y(2), Stemkowski S(2).

Author information:
(1)1 GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.
(2)2 Comprehensive Health Insights, Humana, Louisville, Kentucky.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations can 
accelerate disease progression and lead to higher health care costs. To improve 
patient survival and reduce cost, risk assessment measures should be developed 
to identify patients at risk for exacerbations and prevent future exacerbations.
OBJECTIVES: To (a) externally validate the COPD treatment ratio (CTR) as a 
measure of COPD exacerbation risk based on predictive models previously tested 
and (b) assess the measure's capability to assess risk using only pharmacy 
claims for use in Medicare Part D programs.
METHODS: This was a retrospective observational study conducted using the Humana 
research datasets. Separate assessments were performed using pharmacy-only 
models that excluded risk factors derived from medical claims. Patients were 
aged ≥ 40 years, with ≥ 1 inpatient hospitalization or ≥ 2 physician's office, 
emergency department, or urgent care visits with a COPD diagnosis. Using 
logistic regression models, risk factors (age, exacerbation history, COPD and 
concomitant medication use, and comorbidities) were assessed during the baseline 
period (year 1) and were used to predict the risk of exacerbation during year 2. 
Continuous and dichotomized CTRs were analyzed. A cut-point of 0.3 was initially 
used for dichotomizing CTR, and subsequently receiver operating characteristics 
(ROC) analysis was used to determine the optimal cut-point for CTR.
RESULTS: A total of 92,496 patients were identified, the majority of which 
(96.2%) were Medicare members with a mean age of 69 years. During the baseline 
period, 14.0% and 11.2% of patients had ≥ 1 moderate or severe exacerbation, 
respectively. Overall, the CTR performed well in predicting future COPD 
exacerbations, especially severe exacerbations. ROC analysis suggested that 0.7 
was the optimal cut-point for dichotomizing CTR. Patients with a CTR ≥ 0.7 had a 
7.9% (OR = 0.921; 95% CI = 0.852-0.995) lower risk of a severe exacerbation, 
compared with those with a CTR < 0.7. Stronger effects were seen in 
pharmacy-only models, with patients 17% less likely to experience a severe 
exacerbation with a CTR ≥ 0.7 compared with patients with a CTR < 0.7.
CONCLUSIONS: This study validated the use of CTR as a modifiable measure of risk 
of COPD exacerbation in a large commercial and Medicare population and remained 
a robust predictor when pharmacy-only claims data were available. A CTR of ≥ 0.7 
may be a useful target to help reduce the risk of severe exacerbations, and its 
use by payer or quality organizations has the potential to improve COPD 
management.
DISCLOSURES: This study was funded by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK; study number 
HO-15-16651). GSK had a role in the study design, collection, analysis, and 
interpretation of data and in the writing of the study report but did not place 
any restrictions on access to the data or on the statements made in the 
manuscript. The authors were in full editorial control of publication target 
journal and content and conclusions, accepted full responsibility for final 
approval of a manuscript describing this GSK-sponsored research, and had final 
responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. Stanford and Lau are 
employees of GSK and hold GSK stocks/shares. Li and Stemkowski are employees of 
Comprehensive Health Insights, which was contracted to conduct the study but did 
not receive funding for manuscript development. This manuscript was presented in 
part at the American Thoracic Society 2017 International Conference; May 19-24, 
2017; Washington, DC.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2019.25.1.058
PMID: 30589629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1113:43-51. doi: 10.1007/5584_2018_160.

COPD Course and Comorbidities: Are There Gender Differences?

Grabicki M(1), Kuźnar-Kamińska B(2), Rubinsztajn R(3), Brajer-Luftmann B(2), 
Kosacka M(4), Nowicka A(2), Piorunek T(2), Kostrzewska M(2), Chazan R(3), 
Batura-Gabryel H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Allergology and Respiratory Oncology, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. grabicki@ump.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Allergology and Respiratory Oncology, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Pneumology and Allergology, Warsaw Medical 
University, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Pulmonology and Lung Cancer, Wroclaw Medical University, 
Wroclaw, Poland.

The prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has increased 
more rapidly in women than in men during the past two decades. Clinical 
presentation, comorbidities and prognosis may differ between genders and may 
influence management decisions. The influence of gender on COPD expression has 
not been clearly explained to date. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate 
significant differences between women and men suffering from COPD, regarding 
clinical presentation, pulmonary function test results, comorbidities, and 
prognosis. We prospectively recruited 470 patients with stable COPD with a 
history of smoking (152 women, 318 men, mean age 65.5 ± 8.8 vs. 
66.6 ± 9.4 years, respectively). Comorbidities and exacerbations were recorded. 
Spirometry, body plethysmography, carbon monoxide diffusing capacity and 6-min 
walk tests were performed. The BODE prognostic score was also calculated. We 
found that women smoked less in comparison to men (30.4 vs. 41.9 pack-years, 
p < 0.05), showed more exacerbations (2.5 vs. 1.7, p = 0.01), higher forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1%predicted), and increased residual volume/total 
lung capacity (RV/%TLC), but they had the same intensity of dyspnea. Women 
showed fewer comorbidities, on average, per patient (5.4 vs. 6.4, p = 0.002), 
but had a higher prevalence of at least seven comorbidities per patient (48.7% 
of women vs. 33.0% of men, p < 0.05). Women also had a significantly worse 
prognosis (4.6 vs. 3.1 BODE score, p < 0.05) that correlated with the number of 
comorbidities (r = 0.33, p < 0.01). In conclusion, this study strongly supports 
the existence of different gender phenotypes in COPD, especially regarding 
exacerbations, comorbidities, and prognosis. The gender difference may indicate 
a need for a targeted assessment and management of COPD in women and men.

DOI: 10.1007/5584_2018_160
PMID: 29488205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Respir Med. 2019 Oct-Nov;158:59-66. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.08.010. Epub 2019 
Aug 22.

A phase III study of triple therapy with budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol 
fumarate metered dose inhaler 320/18/9.6 μg and 160/18/9.6 μg using 
co-suspension delivery technology in moderate-to-very severe COPD: The ETHOS 
study protocol.

Rabe KF(1), Martinez FJ(2), Ferguson GT(3), Wang C(4), Singh D(5), Wedzicha 
JA(6), Trivedi R(7), St Rose E(8), Ballal S(8), McLaren J(9), Darken P(8), 
Reisner C(8), Dorinsky P(7).

Author information:
(1)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf and Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Airway 
Research Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Grosshansdorf, Germany. Electronic address: k.f.rabe@lungenclinic.de.
(2)Joan and Sanford I. Weill Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA.
(3)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(4)National Clinical Research Centre for Respiratory Diseases, China-Japan 
Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(5)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester University 
NHS Foundation Hospitals Trust, Manchester, UK.
(6)Respiratory Division, National Heart and Lung Institute, London, UK.
(7)AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.
(8)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(9)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Single inhaler triple therapies providing an inhaled corticosteroid, 
a long-acting muscarinic antagonist, and a long-acting β2-agonist 
(ICS/LAMA/LABAs) are an emerging treatment option for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Nevertheless, questions remain regarding the optimal 
patient population for triple therapy as well as the benefit:risk ratio of ICS 
treatment.
METHODS: ETHOS is an ongoing, randomized, double-blind, multicenter, 
parallel-group, 52-week study in symptomatic patients with moderate-to-very 
severe COPD and a history of exacerbation(s) in the previous year. Two doses of 
single inhaler triple therapy with budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate 
metered dose inhaler (BGF MDI 320/18/9.6 μg and 160/18/9.6 μg) will be compared 
to glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF) MDI 18/9.6 μg and 
budesonide/formoterol fumarate (BFF) MDI 320/9.6 μg, all formulated using 
co-suspension delivery technology. Outcomes include the rate of moderate/severe 
(primary endpoint) and severe COPD exacerbations, symptoms, quality of life, and 
all-cause mortality. Sub-studies will assess lung function and cardiovascular 
safety.
STUDY POPULATION: From June 2015-July 2018, 16,044 patients were screened and 
8572 were randomized. Preliminary baseline demographics show that 55.9% of 
patients had experienced ≥2 moderate/severe exacerbations in the previous year, 
79.1% were receiving an ICS-containing treatment at study entry, and 59.9% had 
blood eosinophil counts ≥150 cells/mm3.
CONCLUSIONS: ETHOS will provide data on exacerbations, patient-reported 
outcomes, mortality, and safety in 8572 patients with moderate-to-very severe 
COPD receiving triple and dual fixed-dose combinations. For the first time, 
ICS/LAMA/LABA triple therapy with two different doses of ICS will be compared to 
dual ICS/LABA and LAMA/LABA therapies.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02465567.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.08.010
PMID: 31605923


184. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jul 11;14:1539-1548. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S200846. eCollection 2019.

The effects of single inhaler triple therapy vs single inhaler dual therapy or 
separate triple therapy for the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Lai CC(1), Chen CH(2), Lin CYH(3), Wang CY(2), Wang YH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Chi Mei Medical Center, Liouying, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardinal Tien Hospital and School of 
Medicine, College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, 
Taiwan.
(3)Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and Sciences, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Medical Research Center, Cardinal Tien Hospital and School of Medicine, 
College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Jan 21;15:155-156.

BACKGROUND: This study aims to compare the effects of single inhaler triple 
therapy comprised of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs), long-acting β2-agonists 
(LABAs), and long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists (LAMAs) with dual 
therapies comprised of either LABA/LAMA, ICS/LABA or separate ICS/LABA plus LAMA 
triple therapy.
METHODS: The Pubmed, Embase, and Cochrane databases were searched up to October 
31st 2018. Only randomized controlled trials were included in the meta-analysis. 
The primary outcome was the rate of moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations.
RESULTS: Seven studies fulfilling the inclusion criteria were included in the 
meta-analysis. Single inhaler triple therapy was associated with a significantly 
lower risk of COPD exacerbation compared with LABA/LAMA (rate ratio, 0.69; 95% 
confidence interval [CI] 0.55 to 0.87, I2 =85%), and ICS/LABA (rate ratio, 0.81; 
95% CI 0.73 to 0.89, I2 =29%) dual therapy. Single inhaler triple therapy led to 
a more significant improvement in lung function and quality of life compared 
with LABA/LAMA and ICS/LABA dual therapy. Single inhaler triple therapy was 
associated with a higher risk of pneumonia compared with LABA/LAMA (risk ratio, 
1.38, 95% CI 1.14 to 1.67, I2 =0) dual therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of single inhaler triple therapy for COPD patients can 
result in lower rates of moderate or severe exacerbations of COPD as well as 
improved lung function and quality of life compared with dual therapy with 
LABA/LAMA or ICS/LABA.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S200846
PMCID: PMC6628970
PMID: 31371939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


185. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2019 Sep;74(3):255-265. doi: 
10.1097/FJC.0000000000000705.

Correlation of Inhaled Long-Acting Bronchodilators With Adverse Cardiovascular 
Outcomes in Patients With Stable COPD: A Bayesian Network Meta-Analysis of 
Randomized Controlled Trials.

Wu J(1), Ye Y(2), Li C(3), Zhou W(2), Chang R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Qinghai Provincial People's Hospital, Xining, 
China.
(2)Qinghai University Graduate School, Xining, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory, Affiliated Hospital of Qinghai University, Xining, 
China.

A majority of existing studies have focused on the efficacy of inhaled 
long-acting bronchodilators (ILABs), such as long-acting muscarinic antagonists 
(LAMAs) and long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs), and LABAs combined with LAMAs in 
treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The current meta-analysis 
aimed to investigate the correlation of ILABs with specific cardiovascular 
adverse events (CAEs). Five electronic databases, including PubMed, Embase, 
Cochrane Library, Scopus, and Web of Science were systematically retrieved. 
Finally, 16 randomized controlled trials were enrolled into the current 
meta-analysis. Typically, the efficacy of 3 major classes of drugs (LABAs, 
LAMAs, and LABAs combined with LAMAs), and 7 specific drugs (including 
formoterol, glycopyrrolate, indacaterol, olodaterol, Salmeterol, tiotropium, and 
vilanterol) for 4 CAEs, including myocardial infarction, cardiac failure (CF), 
ischemic heart disease (IHD), and stroke in stable COPD patients, was examined. 
All the pooled results were analyzed through the odds ratios (ORs) with the 
corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The direct meta-analysis results 
suggested that LABAs could increase the risk of CF in patients with stable COPD 
compared with placebo controls (OR 1.70, 95% CI, 1.00-2.90). In addition, 
network meta-analysis results indicated that LAMAs combined with LABAs would 
result in an increased risk of CF in patients with stable COPD (OR 2.31, 95% CI, 
1.10-5.09). According to the ILABs specific drug analysis, formoterol may 
potentially have protective effects on IHD compared with placebo controls (OR 
0.45, 95% CI, 0.18-1.00). In conclusion, among these 3 kinds of ILABs, including 
LAMAs, LABAs, and LABAs/LAMAs, for stable COPD patients, LAMAs and LABAs are 
associated with the least possibility to induce myocardial infarction and 
stroke, respectively. However, the application of LABAs will probably increase 
the risk of CF; they should be used with caution for stable COPD patients with 
CF. In addition, in specific-drug analysis, the use of formoterol can reduce the 
risk of treatment-related IHD. Nevertheless, more studies on different drug 
doses are needed in the future to further validate this conclusion.

DOI: 10.1097/FJC.0000000000000705
PMID: 31306366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Drugs. 2019 Jun;79(9):997-1008. doi: 10.1007/s40265-019-01133-w.

Tiotropium/Olodaterol: A Review in COPD.

Blair HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand. demail@springer.com.

Erratum in
    Drugs. 2019 Jul 18;:

Tiotropium/olodaterol (Stiolto® Respimat®; Spiolto® Respimat®) is an inhaled 
fixed-dose combination of the long-acting muscarinic antagonist tiotropium 
bromide (hereafter referred to as tiotropium) and the long-acting β2-adrenergic 
agonist olodaterol. It is available in several countries, including the USA, 
Japan, China and those of the EU, where it is indicated for the long-term 
maintenance treatment of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). The efficacy of tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg/day in patients with COPD 
was evaluated in phase III or IV trials of 6-52 weeks' duration. 
Tiotropium/olodaterol improved lung function to a greater extent than each of 
its individual components or placebo in 12- and 52-week trials. In 6-week 
trials, tiotropium/olodaterol provided greater lung function benefits over 24 h 
than the individual components, placebo or twice-daily fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol. Tiotropium/olodaterol also demonstrated beneficial 
effects on health-related quality of life (HR-QoL), dyspnoea, inspiratory 
capacity, exercise endurance and the need for rescue medication. In an 8-week 
open-label trial, umeclidinium/vilanterol was superior to tiotropium/olodaterol 
for the primary endpoint of trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s. The 
tolerability profile of tiotropium/olodaterol was generally similar to that of 
the individual components. In conclusion, tiotropium/olodaterol provides a 
useful option for the maintenance treatment of COPD, with the convenience of 
once-daily administration via a single inhaler.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-019-01133-w
PMCID: PMC6647411
PMID: 31119643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Hannah Blair is a salaried employee of Adis 
International Ltd/Springer Nature, is responsible for the article content and 
declares no relevant conflicts of interest.


187. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jun 28;14:1377-1388. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S194856. eCollection 2019.

Patient-reported outcomes of dual bronchodilator fixed-dose combination versus 
bronchodilator monotherapy in individuals with COPD.

Strange C(1), Walker V(2), DePietro M(3), Tong J(2), Kurlander J(2), Carlyle 
M(2), Millette LA(3), Wittbrodt E(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(2)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum, Inc., Eden Prairie, MN, USA.
(3)US Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(4)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, AstraZeneca, Wilmington, DE, USA.

Background: This study compared real-world patient-reported outcomes (PROs) 
measured by the Clinical COPD Questionnaire (CCQ), the London Chest Activities 
of Daily Living (LCADL) scale, and the Work Productivity and Activity Impairment 
(WPAI) questionnaire between individuals with COPD initiating LAMA/LABA 
fixed-dose combination (FDC) dual therapy versus either long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA) or long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA) monotherapy. Methods: 
Individuals with COPD aged ≥40 years initiating a LAMA/LABA FDC dual therapy or 
a LAMA or LABA monotherapy (index date = first prescription date) between 
January 1, 2016 and December 31, 2016 were identified from a large US 
administrative claims database. Individuals were excluded if they were 
prescribed an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) or ICS/LABA two months prior to the 
index date or were diagnosed with cystic fibrosis, idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis, or asthma. The cohorts were propensity score matched (PSM) 1:1 for 
COPD severity using baseline measures. Each participant completed a survey. 
Results: Surveys were completed by 399 participants in the dual therapy cohort, 
and 718 participants in the monotherapy cohort. Following PSM, 379 participants 
remained in each cohort for analysis (monotherapy: 369 LAMA and 10 LABA). The 
dual therapy cohort reported fewer COPD-related symptoms (CCQ symptom score 2.75 
vs 2.97, respectively, P=0.023), and, fewer limitations in leisure activities 
(LCADL leisure score 4.78 vs 5.17, respectively, P=0.021) versus the monotherapy 
cohort. No significant differences were found in the WPAI. A greater percentage 
of participants in the dual therapy cohort stayed on index therapy (63.1%) when 
compared with the monotherapy cohort (30.3%, P<0.0001). Conclusions: Only 30% of 
the participants prescribed monotherapy, usually with a LAMA, remained on index 
therapy alone at the time of survey administration. In the dual therapy cohort, 
63% of the participants remained on the index medication and had fewer 
COPD-related symptoms and fewer limitations in leisure activities compared with 
participants in the monotherapy cohort.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S194856
PMCID: PMC6612016
PMID: 31303751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Charlie Strange reports personal fees and 
non-financial support from AstraZeneca, CSA Medical, Glaxo Smith Kline, BTG, 
grants, personal fees, non-financial support from Pulmonx, personal fees from 
Uptake Medical, and grants from MatRx, all in COPD outside the submitted work. 
Ms Maureen Carlyle, Mr Jonathan Kurlander, Dr Junliang Tong, and Ms Valery 
Walker report support from AstraZeneca during the time that this study was 
conducted. Dr Eric Wittbrodt reports that he is an employee of AstraZeneca. Dr 
Michael DePietro reports that he was an employee of AstraZeneca during the time 
that this study was conducted and is currently an employee of Teva 
Pharmaceuticals. Dr Lauren A Millette reports that she was an employee of 
AstraZeneca during the time that this study was conducted and is currently an 
employee of Genentech. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


188. Respir Res. 2020 Jan 6;21(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1262-0.

Risk factors for exacerbations and pneumonia in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: a pooled analysis.

Hartley BF(1), Barnes NC(2)(3), Lettis S(4), Compton CH(2), Papi A(5), Jones 
P(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Veramed Ltd, Twickenham, UK.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline plc, Brentford, UK.
(3)William Harvey Institute, Bart's and the London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, London, UK.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline plc, Uxbridge, UK. sally.x.lettis@gsk.com.
(5)University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(6)Institute of Infection and Immunity, St George's, University of London, 
London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are at 
risk of exacerbations and pneumonia; how the risk factors interact is unclear.
METHODS: This post-hoc, pooled analysis included studies of COPD patients 
treated with inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2 agonist (LABA) 
combinations and comparator arms of ICS, LABA, and/or placebo. Backward 
elimination via Cox's proportional hazards regression modelling evaluated which 
combination of risk factors best predicts time to first (a) pneumonia, and (b) 
moderate/severe COPD exacerbation.
RESULTS: Five studies contributed: NCT01009463, NCT01017952, NCT00144911, 
NCT00115492, and NCT00268216. Low body mass index (BMI), exacerbation history, 
worsening lung function (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
[GOLD] stage), and ICS treatment were identified as factors increasing pneumonia 
risk. BMI was the only pneumonia risk factor influenced by ICS treatment, with 
ICS further increasing risk for those with BMI <25 kg/m2. The modelled 
probability of pneumonia varied between 3 and 12% during the first year. Higher 
exacerbation risk was associated with a history of exacerbations, poorer lung 
function (GOLD stage), female sex and absence of ICS treatment. The influence of 
the other exacerbation risk factors was not modified by ICS treatment. Modelled 
probabilities of an exacerbation varied between 31 and 82% during the first 
year.
CONCLUSIONS: The probability of an exacerbation was considerably higher than for 
pneumonia. ICS reduced exacerbations but did not influence the effect of risks 
associated with prior exacerbation history, GOLD stage, or female sex. The only 
identified risk factor for ICS-induced pneumonia was BMI <25 kg/m2. Analyses of 
this type may help the development of COPD risk equations.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1262-0
PMCID: PMC6945447
PMID: 31907054

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following real or 
perceived conflicts of interest during the last 3 years in relation to this 
work. NCB, CHC, SL, PJ are employees of and hold stock in GlaxoSmithKline. BFH 
is contracted to work on behalf of GlaxoSmithKline plc through a clinical 
research organization and holds stock in GlaxoSmithKline. AP reports grants, 
personal fees, and/or reimbursement of travel expenses from AstraZeneca, Chiesi, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini, Merck Sharp & Dohme, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Teva, Sanofi, and Zambon.


189. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Apr 16;14:853-861. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S189585. eCollection 2019.

Inhaled corticosteroid use by exacerbations and eosinophils: a real-world COPD 
population.

Vestbo J(1), Vogelmeier CF(2), Small M(3), Siddall J(3), Fogel R(4), Kostikas 
K(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection, Immunity & Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(2)Department for Pulmonary Medicine, Philipps-University of Marburg, Marburg, 
Germany.
(3)Respiratory Research, Adelphi Real World, Bollington, UK.
(4)Global Medical Affairs, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Respiratory Medicine Department, University of Ionnina Medical School, 
Ionnina, Greece.

Background: Blood eosinophils may predict response to inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) where ICS is recommended 
in patients at high risk of exacerbations. The proportion of patients who may 
benefit the most from ICS-based therapy was quantified in a real-world 
population. Materials and methods: European data from the Adelphi Real World 
Respiratory Disease Specific Programme™ 2017 survey were collected from 
consecutive COPD patients by participating physicians. Overall, 1,528 patients 
were assessable for Global Initiative for COPD (GOLD) 2017 status and were 
included in the analysis. Results: More GOLD D patients had elevated eosinophil 
counts compared with GOLD B. The proportions of GOLD D patients with a history 
of ≥2 exacerbations and eosinophil counts of ≥150, ≥300, and ≥400 cells/µL were 
81.2%, 39.4%, and 24.6%, respectively. In total, 10.6% of the patients had ≥300 
eosinophils/µL and a history of ≥2 exacerbations. ICS-based therapy was received 
by 41.5% of GOLD B and 68.0% of GOLD D patients. Conclusion: There was no 
apparent relation between ICS use and eosinophil blood count. There are 
differences in the distributions of patients with frequent exacerbations and/or 
high blood eosinophil counts and the use of ICS in COPD. These data may provide 
information for the implementation of future treatment recommendations.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S189585
PMCID: PMC6489586
PMID: 31114183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JV reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, 
grants, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Chiesi, and Novartis, outside the submitted work; 
CV reports grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
received personal fees from CSL Behring, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, 
Menarini, Mundipharma, Novartis, Teva, Bayer Schering Pharma AG, MSD, and 
Pfizer, outside the submitted work; MS reports non-personal fees (work by 
Adelphi from Novartis), during the conduct of the study; and is a full time 
employee of Adelphi Real World. JS reports nothing from Novartis, during the 
conduct of the study; and is a full time employee of Adelphi Real World. RF is 
an employee of and own stock in Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. KK was an 
employee of Novartis at the time of conduct of this study. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this work.


190. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2019 Jul;370(1):127-136. doi: 10.1124/jpet.118.255620. 
Epub 2019 May 13.

Pharmacological Profile of AZD8871 (LAS191351), a Novel Inhaled Dual M(3) 
Receptor Antagonist/β (2)-Adrenoceptor Agonist Molecule with Long-Lasting 
Effects and Favorable Safety Profile.

Aparici M(1), Carcasona C(2), Ramos I(2), Montero JL(2), Otal R(2), Ortiz JL(2), 
Cortijo J(2), Puig C(2), Vilella D(2), De Alba J(2), Doe C(2), Gavaldà A(2), 
Miralpeix M(2).

Author information:
(1)Almirall, Research & Development Center, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Barcelona, 
Spain (M.A., C.C., I.R., J.L.M., R.O., C.P., D.V., J.D.A., C.D., A.G., M.M.); 
and Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Valencia, 
Valencia, Spain (J.L.O., J.C.) monica.aparici@almirall.com.
(2)Almirall, Research & Development Center, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Barcelona, 
Spain (M.A., C.C., I.R., J.L.M., R.O., C.P., D.V., J.D.A., C.D., A.G., M.M.); 
and Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Valencia, 
Valencia, Spain (J.L.O., J.C.).

AZD8871 is a novel muscarinic antagonist and β 2-adrenoceptor agonist in 
development for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This study describes the 
pharmacological profile of AZD8871 in in vitro and in vivo assays. AZD8871 is 
potent at the human M3 receptor (pIC50 in binding assays: 9.5) and shows kinetic 
selectivity for the M3 (half-life: 4.97 hours) over the M2 receptor (half-life: 
0.46 hour). It is selective for the β 2-adrenoceptor over the β 1 and β 3 
subtypes (3- and 6-fold, respectively) and shows dual antimuscarinic and β 
2-adrenoceptor functional activity in isolated guinea pig tissue (pIC50 in 
electrically stimulated trachea: 8.6; pEC50 in spontaneous tone isolated 
trachea: 8.8, respectively), which are sustained over time. AZD8871 exhibits a 
higher muscarinic component than batefenterol in human bronchi, with a shift in 
potency under propranolol blockade of 2- and 6-fold, respectively, together with 
a persisting relaxation (5.3% recovery at 8 hours). Nebulized AZD8871 prevents 
acetylcholine-induced bronchoconstriction in both guinea pig and dog with 
minimal effects on salivation and heart rate at doses with bronchoprotective 
activity. Moreover, AZD8871 shows long-lasting effects in dog, with a 
bronchoprotective half-life longer than 24 hours. In conclusion, these studies 
demonstrate that AZD8871 is a dual-acting molecule with a high muscarinic 
component and a long residence time at the M3 receptor; moreover, its 
preclinical profile in animal models suggests a once-daily dosing in humans and 
a favorable safety profile. Thus, AZD8871 has the potential to be a next 
generation of inhaled bronchodilators in respiratory diseases.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.118.255620
PMID: 31085697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Med Klin Intensivmed Notfmed. 2019 Apr;114(3):234-239. doi: 
10.1007/s00063-017-0318-5. Epub 2017 Jul 13.

[Update: acute hypercapnic respiratory failure].

[Article in German]

Seiler F(1)(2), Trudzinski FC(3)(4), Kredel M(5), Lotz C(5), Lepper PM(3)(4), 
Muellenbach RM(6).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Innere Medizin V - Pneumologie, Allergologie, Intensivmedizin, 
Universitätsklinikum des Saarlandes, Kirrberger Str. 100, 66421, Homburg/Saar, 
Deutschland. frederik.seiler@uks.eu.
(2)ECLS Center Saar, 66421, Homburg, Deutschland. frederik.seiler@uks.eu.
(3)Klinik für Innere Medizin V - Pneumologie, Allergologie, Intensivmedizin, 
Universitätsklinikum des Saarlandes, Kirrberger Str. 100, 66421, Homburg/Saar, 
Deutschland.
(4)ECLS Center Saar, 66421, Homburg, Deutschland.
(5)Universitätsklinikum Würzburg, Klinik und Poliklinik für Anästhesiologie, 
97080, Würzburg, Deutschland.
(6)Klinik für Anästhesiologie, Intensivmedizin und Schmerztherapie, Klinikum 
Kassel GmbH, 34125, Kassel, Deutschland.

BACKGROUND: Hypercapnic respiratory failure is a frequent problem in critical 
care and mainly affects patients with acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) and 
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). In recent years, the usage of 
extracorporeal CO2 removal (ECCO2R) has been increasing.
OBJECTIVE: Summarizing the state of the art in the management of hypercapnic 
respiratory failure with special regard to the role of ECCO2R.
METHODS: Review based on a selective literature search and the clinical and 
scientific experience of the authors.
RESULTS: Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) is the therapy of choice in hypercapnic 
respiratory failure due to AECOPD, enabling stabilization in the majority of 
cases and generally improving prognosis. Patients in whom NIV fails have an 
increased mortality. In these patients, ECCO2R may be sufficient to avoid 
intubation or to shorten time on invasive ventilation; however, corresponding 
evidence is sparse or even missing when it comes to hard endpoints. 
Lung-protective ventilation according to the ARDS network is the standard 
therapy of ARDS. In severe ARDS, low tidal volume ventilation may result in 
critical hypercapnia. ECCO2R facilitates compensation of respiratory acidosis 
even under "ultra-protective" ventilator settings. Yet, no positive prognostic 
effects could be demonstrated so far.
CONCLUSION: Optimized use of NIV and lung-protective ventilation remains 
standard of care in the management of hypercapnic respiratory failure. 
Currently, ECCO2R has to be considered an experimental approach, which should 
only be provided by experienced centers or in the context of clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1007/s00063-017-0318-5
PMID: 28707030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Clin Pharmacol Drug Dev. 2020 Jan;9(1):130-139. doi: 10.1002/cpdd.732. Epub 2019 
Aug 29.

Revefenacin, a Long-Acting Muscarinic Antagonist, Does Not Prolong QT Interval 
in Healthy Subjects: Results of a Placebo- and Positive-Controlled Thorough QT 
Study.

Borin MT(1), Barnes CN(1), Darpo B(2), Pendyala S(1), Xue H(2), Bourdet DL(1).

Author information:
(1)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)ERT, previously iCardiac Technologies, Rochester, New York, USA.

Revefenacin is a novel once-daily, lung-selective, long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist developed as a nebulized inhalation solution for the maintenance 
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In a randomized, 4-way 
crossover study, healthy subjects received a single inhaled dose of revefenacin 
175 µg (therapeutic dose), revefenacin 700 µg (supratherapeutic dose), and 
placebo via standard jet nebulizer, and a single oral dose of moxifloxacin 
400 mg (open-label) in separate treatment periods. Electrocardiograms were 
recorded, and pharmacokinetic samples were collected serially after dosing. The 
primary end point was the placebo-corrected change from baseline QT interval 
corrected for heart rate using Fridericia's formula, analyzed at each postdose 
time. Concentration-QTc modeling was also performed. Following administration of 
revefenacin 175  and 700 µg, placebo-corrected change from baseline QTcF 
(ΔΔQTcF) values were close to 0 at all times, with the largest mean ΔΔQTcF of 
1.0 millisecond (95% confidence interval [CI], -1.2 to 3.1 milliseconds) 8 hours 
postdose and 1.0 millisecond (95%CI, -1.1 to 3.1 milliseconds) 1 hour postdose 
after inhalation of revefenacin 175 and 700 µg, respectively. Revefenacin did 
not have a clinically meaningful effect on heart rate (within ±5 beats per 
minute of placebo), or PR and QRS intervals (within ±3 and ±1 milliseconds of 
placebo, respectively). Using concentration-QTc modeling, an effect of 
revefenacin > 10 milliseconds can be excluded within the observed plasma 
concentration range of up to ≈3 ng/mL. Both doses of revefenacin were well 
tolerated. These results demonstrate that revefenacin does not prolong the QT 
interval.

© 2019 Theravance Biopharma. Clinical Pharmacology in Drug Development published 
by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American College of Clinical 
Pharmacology.

DOI: 10.1002/cpdd.732
PMCID: PMC7004040
PMID: 31468714

Conflict of interest statement: Marie T. Borin is a consultant for and received 
financial support from Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. Borje Darpo is a consultant 
for and owns stock in ERT. Hongqi Xue is an employee of ERT. David L. Bourdet is 
an employee of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. Chris N. Barnes and Srikanth 
Pendyala were employees of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. at the time this study 
was conducted.


193. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 27;14:2229-2234. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S219051. eCollection 2019.

Time To Revise COPD Treatment Algorithm.

Matsunaga K(1), Oishi K(2), Miravitlles M(3), Anzueto A(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Disease, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yamaguchi University, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan.
(2)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Yamaguchi University, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan.
(3)Department of Pneumology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron/Vall d'Hebron 
Research Institute (VHIR), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades 
Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, School of 
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(5)Pulmonary Diseases Section, Audie L. Murphy Memorial VA Hospital, South Texas 
Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.

In 2017, a new two-step algorithm for the treatment of COPD was proposed. This 
algorithm was based on the severity of symptoms and phenotypes or treatable 
traits, and patient-specialised assessment targeting eosinophilic inflammation, 
chronic bronchitis, and frequent infections is recommended after exacerbation 
occurs despite maximal bronchodilation therapy. However, recent studies have 
revealed the clinical characteristics of patients who should have second 
controllers added, such as ICS. We again realized that treatable traits should 
be assessed and intervened for as early as possible. Moreover, the treatment 
algorithm is necessary to be adapted to the situation of clinical practice, 
taking into account the characteristics of the patients. The time to revise COPD 
treatment algorithm has come and we propose a new 3-step parallel approach for 
initial COPD treatment. After the diagnosis of COPD, the first assessment is to 
divide into two categories based on the usual clinical characteristics for 
patients with COPD and the specific clinical characteristics for each patient 
with concomitant disease. In the former, the assessment should be based on the 
level of dyspnea and the frequency of exacerbations. After the assessment, mono- 
or dual bronchodilator should be selected. In the latter, the assessment should 
be based on asthma characteristics, chronic bronchitis, and chronic heart 
failure. After the assessment, patients with asthmatic characteristics may 
consider treatment with ICS, while patients with chronic bronchitis may consider 
treatment with roflumilast and/or macrolide, while patients with chronic heart 
failure may consider treatment with selective β1-blocker. The 3-step parallel 
approach is completed by adding an additional therapy for patients with 
concomitant disease to essential therapy for patients with COPD. In addition, it 
is important to review the response around 4 weeks after the initial therapy. 
This COPD management proposal might be considered as an approach based on 
patients' clinical characteristics and on personalized therapy.

© 2019 Matsunaga et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S219051
PMCID: PMC6776289
PMID: 31631994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Kazuto Matsunaga has received consulting fees 
and lecture fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Astellas, Astra-Zeneca, Sanofi, 
Meiji-Seika Pharma, Novartis, Kyorin Pharma, Chest, Torii pharma, and 
GlaxoSmithKline, outside the submitted work. Keiji Oishi reports speaker fees 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, Astra-Zeneca, Meiji-Seika Pharma, Novartis, Kyorin 
Pharma, outside the submitted work. Marc Miravitlles has received speaker fees 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, Menarini, Rovi, Bial, CSL 
Behring, Grifols and Novartis, consulting fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Bial, Gebro Pharma, CSL Behring, 
Laboratorios Esteve, Ferrer, Mereo Biopharma, Verona Pharma, pH Pharma, Novartis 
and Grifols and research grants from GlaxoSmithKline and Grifols, outside the 
submitted work. Antonio Anzueto has received consulting fees, lecture fees, and 
travel support from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Sunovion, 
GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis, and grant support from GlaxoSmithKline, outside 
the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


194. Clin Respir J. 2019 Jul;13(7):438-445. doi: 10.1111/crj.13028. Epub 2019 Apr 22.

The v-DECAF score can predict 90-day all-cause mortality in patients with COPD 
exacerbation requiring invasive mechanical ventilation.

Shi QF(1), Sheng Y(1), Zhu N(1), Tan Y(1), Xie XH(1), Wang SY(1), Cai JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine Shanghai Pudong Hospital, 
Fudan University Pudong Medical Center, Pudong, China.

INTRODUCTION: The DECAF score is a simple and effective tool for predicting 
mortality in patients hospitalized with acute exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD); however, the DECAF score has not been 
validated in AECOPD patients requiring invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV). We 
devised the ventilator (v)-DECAF score, in which "anemia" replaces "acidaemia," 
for use in AECOPD patients requiring IMV. The objective of this study was to 
compare the predictive efficacy of the v-DECAF score and the DECAF score.
METHODS: This study prospectively recruited 112 consecutive AECOPD patients 
requiring IMV from a single center. The clinical endpoint was 90-day all-cause 
mortality. Demographic and clinical data were recorded, as well as APACHE II, 
GCS, CURB-65, BAP-65 and DECAF scores, and the newly devised v-DECAF score. The 
discriminatory value of the scoring systems in predicting 90-day all-cause 
mortality was determined using the area under the receiver operating 
characteristic (AUROC) curve.
RESULTS: In multivariate logistic regression analysis, the v-DECAF score was an 
independent predictor of 90-day all-cause mortality (odds ratio 3.004, 95% CI 
1.658-5.445, P < 0.001). The AUROC of the v-DECAF and DECAF scores were 0.852 
(95% CI 0.766-0.938) and 0.777 (95%CI: 0.676-0.878), respectively. The v-DECAF 
score had a better predictive value for 90-day all-cause mortality compared to 
the DECAF score (Z = 2.338, P = 0.019).
CONCLUSION: The v-DECAF score had good discriminatory power in predicting 90-day 
all-cause mortality in AECOPD patients requiring IMV.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13028
PMID: 30955228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Drugs Aging. 2019 Aug;36(8):733-745. doi: 10.1007/s40266-019-00680-x.

Optimizing Drug Therapies in Patients with COPD in the US Nursing Home Setting.

Pleasants RA(1)(2), Radlowski PA(3), Davidson HE(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)UNC Chapel Hill Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Durham Veterans Administration Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Insight Therapeutics, LLC, 150 Boush Street, Suite 1005, Norfolk, VA, 23510, 
USA.
(4)Insight Therapeutics, LLC, 150 Boush Street, Suite 1005, Norfolk, VA, 23510, 
USA. edavidson@inther.com.
(5)Clinical Internal Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, 
USA. edavidson@inther.com.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) can be a disabling disease, and the 
impact on older adults is particularly evident in the nursing home setting. 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is present in about 20% of nursing home 
residents, most often in women, and accounts for significant healthcare 
utilization including acute care visits for exacerbations and pneumonia, as well 
as worsening heart disease and diabetes mellitus. The emphasis on hospital 
readmissions is particularly important in nursing homes where institutions have 
quality measures that have financial implications. Optimizing drug therapies in 
individuals with COPD involves choosing medications that not only improve 
symptoms, but also decrease the risk of exacerbations. Optimizing the treatment 
of comorbidities such as heart disease, infections, and diabetes that may affect 
COPD outcomes is also an important consideration. Depending on the nursing home 
setting and the patient, the options for optimizing COPD drug therapies may be 
limited owing to patient-related factors such as cognition and physical 
impairment or available resources, primarily reimbursement-related issues. 
Choosing the best drug therapy for COPD in older adults is limited by the 
difficulty in assessing respiratory symptoms using standardized assessment tools 
and potentially decreased inspiratory ability of frail individuals. Because of 
cognitive and physical impediments, ensuring optimal delivery of inhaled 
medications into the lungs has significant challenges. Long-acting 
bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids, and roflumilast decrease the risk of 
exacerbations, although inhaled corticosteroids should be used judiciously in 
this population because of the risk of pneumonia and oropharyngeal side effects. 
Treatment of COPD exacerbations should occur early and consideration should be 
made to the benefits and risks of systemic corticosteroids and antibiotics. 
Clinical research in the COPD population in nursing homes is clearly lacking, 
and ripe for discovery of effective management strategies.

DOI: 10.1007/s40266-019-00680-x
PMID: 31172422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Respir Med. 2019 Jul;153:38-43. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.05.010. Epub 2019 May 
23.

Revefenacin, a once-daily, lung-selective, long-acting muscarinic antagonist for 
nebulized therapy: Safety and tolerability results of a 52-week phase 3 trial in 
moderate to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Donohue JF(1), Kerwin E(2), Sethi S(3), Haumann B(4), Pendyala S(4), Dean L(4), 
Barnes CN(4), Moran EJ(4), Crater G(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Medicine, UNC School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, Medford, OR, USA.
(3)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., 901 Gateway Boulevard, South San Francisco, 
CA, 94080, USA.
(5)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., 901 Gateway Boulevard, South San Francisco, 
CA, 94080, USA. Electronic address: gcrater@theravance.com.

BACKGROUND: Prior replicate 12-week phase 3 trials demonstrated that once-daily 
doses of revefenacin inhalation solution at 88 μg and 175 μg produced 
significant bronchodilation over 24 h post dose in patients with moderate to 
very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The objective was to 
characterize the safety profile of revefenacin 88 μg and 175 μg over 52 weeks of 
treatment.
METHODS: In this randomized, parallel-group, 52-week trial (NCT02518139), 1055 
participants with moderate to very severe COPD received revefenacin 88 μg or 
175 μg in a double-blind manner, or open-label active control tiotropium.
RESULTS: Treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs) were comparable across all 
treatment groups (n [%] patients; revefenacin 88 μg, 272 [74.7%]; 175 μg, 242 
[72.2%]; tiotropium, 275 [77.2%]). Numerically fewer COPD exacerbations (n [%] 
patients) were observed with revefenacin 175 μg (73 [21.8%]) than with 88 μg 
(107 [29.4%]) or tiotropium (100 [28.1%]). Serious AEs were comparable with 
revefenacin 88 μg (58 [15.9%] and tiotropium (58 [16.3%]), but were lower with 
revefenacin 175 μg (43 [12.8%]), and mortality was low. In patients using 
revefenacin 88 μg or tiotropium with a concurrent long-acting β-agonist (LABA) 
product, the incidence of AEs was slightly higher than without concurrent LABA. 
LABA did not affect the incidence of AEs for patients who received revefenacin 
175 μg.
CONCLUSIONS: Revefenacin was generally well tolerated over 52 weeks of 
treatment, and had a safety profile that supports its use as a long-term 
once-daily bronchodilator for the nebulized treatment of COPD.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.05.010
PMID: 31150963


197. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Aug 22;14:1913-1921. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S210975. eCollection 2019.

Does chronic obstructive pulmonary disease increase the risk of prostate cancer? 
A nationwide population-based study.

Hsu WL(#)(1), Chen HY(#)(2), Chang FW(#)(3)(4)(5), Hsu RJ(#)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Hualien Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi 
Medical Foundation, Hualien, Taiwan.
(2)Divisions of Urology, Department of Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Keelung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National 
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Tri-Service General Hospital Penghu Branch, National Defense Medical Center, 
Penghu Branch, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Health Promotion and Health Education, National Taiwan Normal 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Cancer Research Center, Hualien Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical 
Foundation, Hualien, Taiwan.
(7)College of Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major pulmonary 
disease. However, few studies have investigated the relationship between COPD 
and prostate cancer (PCa). This study aimed to investigate the association 
between COPD severity and PCa risk.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a nationwide population-based cohort study 
utilizing data from 2001 to 2013 from the National Health Insurance Research 
Database of Taiwan. Cox proportional hazards models with 1:1 propensity 
score-matched analysis were used to investigate the association between COPD and 
PCa risk. We further divided the COPD group according to severe complications 
(including acute respiratory failure, cardiopulmonary arrest, pneumonia, and 
acute exacerbation) to test for the relationship between COPD severity and PCa 
risk.
RESULTS: This study included 47,634 patients (23,817 COPD patients and 23,817 
matched non-COPD controls). Among them, 756 (1.59%) were diagnosed with PCa 
during a mean follow-up period of 7.05±4.13 years; 387 (1.62%) were from the 
COPD group and 369 (1.55%) were from the control group. Compared with the 
patients without COPD, the adjusted hazard ratio (HR) for PCa in the COPD 
patients was 1.10 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.95-1.27), while that in the 
COPD patients with complications was 2.46 (95% CI 1.96-3.61).
CONCLUSIONS: An increased risk for PCa was found among the COPD patients with 
complications. COPD complications included acute respiratory failure, 
cardiopulmonary arrest, pneumonia, and acute exacerbation. These findings may 
help physicians in treating COPD with complications and in remaining alert to 
the potential development of PCa.

© 2019 Hsu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S210975
PMCID: PMC6709785
PMID: 31686802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


198. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Aug 1;14:1721-1737. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S204649. eCollection 2019.

Real-world effectiveness of umeclidinium/vilanterol versus fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol as initial maintenance therapy for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD): a retrospective cohort study.

Moretz C(1), Sharpsten L(2), Bengtson LG(2), Koep E(2), Le L(2), Tong J(2), 
Stanford RH(1), Hahn B(1), Ray R(3).

Author information:
(1)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum, Eden Prairie, MN, USA.
(3)US Medical Affairs, GSK, Durham, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Retrospective claims data in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) initiating maintenance therapy with inhaled 
fixed-dose combinations of long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting 
β2-agonist (LAMA/LABA) versus inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/LABA have not been 
reported.
METHODS: Retrospective observational study in a COPD-diagnosed population of 
commercial and Medicare Advantage with Part D (MAPD) enrollees aged ≥40 years 
from a US health insurer database. Patients initiated umeclidinium/vilanterol 
(UMEC/VI [62.5/25 µg]) or fluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL [250/50 µg]) 
between April 1, 2014 and August 31, 2016 (index date) and had 12 months 
continuous enrollment pre- and post-index. Exclusion criteria included an asthma 
diagnosis in the pre-index period/index date; ICS-, LABA-, or LAMA-containing 
therapy during the pre-index period; or pharmacy fills for both UMEC/VI and 
FP/SAL, multiple-inhaler triple therapy, a non-index therapy, or COPD 
exacerbation on the index date. Adherence (proportion of days covered [PDC] 
≥80%) was modeled using weighted logistic regression following inverse 
probability of treatment weighting (IPTW). Weighted Kaplan-Meier and Cox 
proportional hazards regression following IPTW were performed for incidence of 
COPD exacerbation and escalation to multiple-inhaler triple therapy.
RESULTS: The study population included 5306 patients (1386 initiating UMEC/VI 
and 3920 initiating FP/SAL). Adjusted odds of adherence were 2.00 times greater 
among UMEC/VI than FP/SAL initiators (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.62─2.46; 
P<0.001). The adjusted hazard ratio (HR) for first exacerbation was 0.87 (95% 
CI: 0.74-1.01; P=0.067) among UMEC/VI versus FP/SAL initiators. UMEC/VI 
initiators had 35% lower adjusted risk of escalation to multiple-inhaler triple 
therapy (HR 0.65; 95% CI: 0.47-0.89; P=0.008) versus FP/SAL. On-treatment, 
UMEC/VI initiators had an adjusted 30% reduced risk of a first moderate/severe 
COPD exacerbation (HR 0.70; 95% CI: 0.54-0.90; P=0.006).
CONCLUSION: Patients with COPD initiating UMEC/VI had higher adherence and 
longer time before escalation to multiple-inhaler triple therapy than FP/SAL 
initiators.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S204649
PMCID: PMC6681903
PMID: 31534326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CM, BH, RR, and RHS are employees of GSK and 
hold stocks/shares in GSK. LGSB, EK, LL, and JT are employees of Optum and LS 
was an employee of Optum at the time of the study, which was contracted by GSK 
to conduct the study. Employees of Optum were not paid for manuscript 
development. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


199. Med Decis Making. 2019 Feb;39(2):152-167. doi: 10.1177/0272989X18824098. Epub 
2019 Jan 24.

Development and Validation of the Evaluation Platform in COPD (EPIC): A 
Population-Based Outcomes Model of COPD for Canada.

Sadatsafavi M(1), Ghanbarian S(1), Adibi A(1), Johnson K(1), FitzGerald JM(2), 
Flanagan W(3), Bryan S(4)(5), Sin D(2); Canadian Respiratory Research Network.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Statistics Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(4)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology and Evaluation, Vancouver Coastal Health 
Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(5)School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: We report the development, validation, and implementation of an 
open-source population-based outcomes model of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) for Canada.
METHODS: Evaluation Platform in COPD (EPIC) is a discrete-event simulation model 
of Canadians 40 years of age or older. Three core features of EPIC are its 
open-population design (incorporating projections of future population growth, 
aging, and smoking trends), its incorporation of heterogeneity in lung function 
decline and burden of exacerbations, and its modeling of the natural history of 
COPD from inception. Multiple original data analyses, as well as values reported 
in the literature, were used to populate the model. Extensive face validity and 
internal and external validity evaluations were performed.
RESULTS: The model was internally validated on demographic projections, 
mortality rates, lung function trajectories, COPD exacerbations, costs and 
health state utility values, and stability of COPD prevalence over time within 
strata of risk factors. In external validation, it moderately overestimated the 
rate of overall exacerbations in 2 independent trials but generated consistent 
estimates of rate of severe exacerbations and mortality.
LIMITATIONS: In its current version, EPIC does not consider uncertainty in the 
evidence. Several components such as additional (e.g., environmental and 
occupational) risk factors, treatment, symptoms, and comorbidity will have to be 
added in future iterations. Predictive validity of EPIC needs to be examined 
prospectively against future empirical studies.
CONCLUSIONS: EPIC is the first multipurpose, open-source, outcome- and 
policy-focused model of COPD for Canada. Platforms of this type have the 
capacity to be iteratively updated to incorporate the latest evidence and to 
project the outcomes of many different scenarios within a consistent framework.

DOI: 10.1177/0272989X18824098
PMID: 30678520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2019 Jan 1;40(1):21-31. doi: 10.2500/aap.2019.40.4192.

Clinical burden of asynchrony in patients with asthma when using metered-dose 
inhalers for control.

Ferro TJ(1), Sundaresan AS(2), Pitcavage JM(3), Ivanova JI(4), Schmerold L(4), 
Ariely R(5), Parikh R(5), Cheng WY(6).

Author information:
(1)From the Global Medical Affairs, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, Frazer, 
Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Health Services Research Core Faculty, 
Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania.
(3)Center for Health Research, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania.
(4)Analysis Group, Inc., New York, New York.
(5)Global Health Economics and Outcome Research, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, 
Frazer, Pennsylvania.
(6)Analysis Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts.

Background: Asynchrony, or lack of coordination between inhalation and actuation 
when using a pressurized metered-dose inhaler (MDI), could theoretically impact 
the delivery of inhaled medications and treatment efficacy. Objective: To assess 
the real-world association between asynchrony and clinical outcomes among 
patients with asthma who receive controller therapy delivered by MDIs. Methods: 
A cohort of patients was assembled via electronic health records. The patients 
were aged ≥12 years, with one or more documentations of an asthma diagnosis, no 
diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and two or more 
prescriptions for an inhalation aerosol corticosteroid alone or with long-acting 
beta-2-agonist delivered via MDI. Their inhaler technique, demonstrated by using 
a placebo MDI, was evaluated at a clinic visit by study nurses who used a 
standardized 10-step checklist. Asynchrony was defined as any gap in timing 
between inhalation and actuation. Clinical outcomes were assessed via electronic 
health records during the 6 months before the clinic visit and were compared 
between patients with and patients without asynchrony by using multivariable 
regression analyses adjusted for age, gender, asthma severity proxy, and 
baseline comorbidities. Results: Of the total 254 eligible patients, mean age of 
49.3 years, 90 males (35.4%), 32 (12.6%) had asynchrony. Patients with 
asynchrony had higher odds of an asthma exacerbation (adjusted odds ratio, 2.99; 
p = 0.009), and lower odds of risk domain asthma control (adjusted odds ratio, 
0.41; p = 0.04) compared with patients without asynchrony. Conclusion: This 
study provided real-world evidence that asynchrony in MDI use among patients 
with asthma who were treated with controller MDIs was associated with clinical 
burden in terms of asthma exacerbations and control.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2019.40.4192
PMID: 30582492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Front Pharmacol. 2019 Nov 27;10:1409. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.01409. eCollection 
2019.

Effect of Bronchodilator and Steroid Use on Heart Disease and Stroke Risks in a 
Bronchiectasis-Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Overlap Cohort: A 
Propensity Score Matching Study.

Yeh JJ(1)(2)(3), Yang YC(3)(4), Hsu CY(5), Kao CH(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chia-Yi Christian 
Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Early Childhood Education and Nursery, Chia Nan University of 
Pharmacy and Science, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Management Office for Health Data, China Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Medicine, College of 
Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Nuclear Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(7)Department of Bioinformatics and Medical Engineering, Asia University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Center of Augmented Intelligence in Healthcare, China Medical University 
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

Background: To determine the effects of bronchodilator, steroid, and 
anti-arrhythmia drug use on the risk of heart disease/stroke (HDS) in patients 
with bronchiectasis-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome 
(BCOS). Methods: We retrospectively enrolled patients with BCOS (BCOS cohort, n 
= 1,493) and patients without bronchiectasis and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) (non-BCOS cohort, n = 5,972). The cumulative incidence of HDS was 
analyzed through Cox proportional regression. We calculated adjusted hazard 
ratios (aHRs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for HDS after adjustments 
for sex, age, comorbidities, long-acting β2-agonist or long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LABAs/LAMAs) use, short-acting β2-agonist or short-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (SABAs/SAMAs) use, oral steroid (OSs) or inhaled corticosteroid 
steroid (ICSs) use, and anti-arrhythmia drugs use. Results: The aHR (95% CI) for 
HDS was 1.08 (0.28-4.06) for patients using LAMAs compared with those not using 
drugs. Regarding drug use days, the aHRs (95% CIs) were 32.2 (1.79-773.0), 1.85 
(1.01-3.39), and 31.1 (3.25-297.80) for those with recent SABAs use, past ICSs 
use, and past anti-arrythmia drugs use, respectively. Regarding cumulative drug 
dose, the aHRs (95% CIs) were 2.12 (1.46-3.10), 3.48 (1.13-10.6), 3.19 
(2.04-4.99), 28.1 (1.42-555.7), 2.09 (1.32-3.29), 2.28 (1.53-3.40), and 1.93 
(1.36-2.74) for those with a low dose of SABAs, medium dose of SABAs, low dose 
of SAMAs, low dose of ICSs, medium dose of ICSs, low dose of OSs, and medium 
dose of OSs, respectively. Conclusions: Compared with patients without 
bronchiectasis and COPD, BCOS patients with recent SABAs, past ICSs, and past 
anti-arrhythmia drugs use; a low or medium SABAs ICSs, and OSs dose; and a low 
SAMAs dose had a higher risk of HDS. LAMAs were not associated with HDS.

Copyright © 2019 Yeh, Yang, Hsu and Kao.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2019.01409
PMCID: PMC6895570
PMID: 31849665


202. Aging (Albany NY). 2019 Jun 7;11(11):3650-3667. doi: 10.18632/aging.102004.

Real-world effectiveness of medications on survival in patients with COPD-heart 
failure overlap.

Su VY(#)(1)(2)(3), Yang YH(#)(4)(5)(6)(7), Perng DW(8)(2), Tsai YH(9)(10), Chou 
KT(8)(2)(3), Su KC(8)(2), Su WJ(8)(2), Chen PC(11), Yang KY(8)(2)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei City 
Government, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(4)Health Information and Epidemiology Laboratory, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Chiayi, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Chiayi, Taiwan.
(6)School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(7)Institute of Occupational Medicine and Industrial Hygiene, National Taiwan 
University College of Public Health, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(9)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and Department of 
Respiratory Care, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Respiratory Therapy, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(11)Department of Environmental and Occupational Medicine, National Taiwan 
University Hospital and National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(12)Institute of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, National Yang-Ming 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(13)Cancer Progression Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Aging (Albany NY). 2019 Oct 7;11(19):8728-8729.

The appropriate treatment for patients with coexistent chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and heart failure (HF) remains unclear. Data from the 
Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database was used for this 
retrospective cohort study. Patients diagnosed with both diseases between 1997 
and 2012 were enrolled as the COPD-heart failure overlap cohort. Patients were 
categorized as non-users and users of specific COPD and HF medications. 
Medication prescriptions in each 3-month and 1-year period served as 
time-dependent covariates. The primary endpoint was cumulative survival. The 
validation study confirmed the accuracy of definitions of COPD (94.0% 
sensitivity) and HF (96.3% sensitivity).The study included 275,436 patients with 
COPD-heart failure overlap, with a mean follow-up period of 9.32 years. The 
COPD-heart failure overlap cohort had more medical service use and higher 
mortality than did the COPD alone cohort. Use of inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS)/long-acting β2 agonist (LABA) combinations, long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), β blockers, aldosterone 
antagonists, and statins reduced mortality risk compared with non-use. 
Sensitivity and subgroup analyses confirmed the consistency and robustness of 
results.ICS/LABA combinations, LAMA, ARBs, β blockers, aldosterone antagonists, 
and statins use was associated with a lower mortality risk in patients with 
COPD-heart failure overlap.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.102004
PMCID: PMC6594806
PMID: 31175265

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.


203. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2019 Dec 1;384:114778. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2019.114778. 
Epub 2019 Oct 13.

Tiotropium bromide, a long acting muscarinic receptor antagonist triggers 
intracellular calcium signalling in the heart.

Cassambai S(1), Mee CJ(2), Renshaw D(2), Hussain A(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sports, Exercise and Life Sciences, Coventry University, Coventry 
CV1 5FB, United Kingdom; Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of 
Leicester, NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, Leicester, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: sc720@le.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Sports, Exercise and Life Sciences, Coventry University, Coventry 
CV1 5FB, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Tiotropium bromide (TB) is a long acting muscarinic 
receptor antagonist used to manage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Recent meta-analyses suggest an increased risk of cardiovascular events with TB. 
Ca2+/calmodulin dependent kinase II (CaMKII) and L-type Ca2+ channels regulate 
Ca2+ concentrations allowing management of Ca2+ across membranes. Pathological 
increases in Ca2+ are initially slow and progressive, however once the cytosolic 
concentration rises >1-3 μM from ~100 nM, calcium overload occurs and can lead 
to cell death. Ipratropium bromide, a short acting muscarinic receptor 
antagonist has previously been found to induce Ca2+ mediated eryptosis. The aim 
of this study was to investigate the role of Ca2+ in Tiotropium bromide mediated 
cardiotoxicity.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Isolated Sprague-Dawley rat hearts were perfused with TB 
(10-0.1 nM) ± KN-93 (400 nM) or nifedipine (1 nM). Hearts were stained to 
determine infarct size (%) using triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC), or snap 
frozen to determine p-CaMKII (Thr286) expression. Cardiomyocytes were isolated 
using a modified Langendorff perfusion and enzymatic dissociation before 
preparation for Fluo 3-AM staining and flow cytometric analysis.
KEY RESULTS: TB increased infarct size compared to controls by 6.91-8.41%, with 
no effect on haemodynamic function. KN-93/nifedipine with TB showed a 5.90/7.38% 
decrease in infarct size compared to TB alone, the combined use of KN-93 with TB 
also showed a significant increase in left ventricular developed pressure whilst 
nifedipine with TB showed a significant decrease in coronary flow. TB showed a 
42.73% increase in p-CaMKII (Thr286) versus control, and increased Ca2+ 
fluorescence by 30.63% in cardiomyocytes.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first pre-clinical 
study to show that Tiotropium bromide induces Ca2+ signalling via CaMKII and 
L-type Ca2+ channels to result in cell damage. This has significant clinical 
impact due to long term use of TB in COPD patients, and warrants assessment of 
cardiac drug safety.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2019.114778
PMID: 31618660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 12;14:2121-2129. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S211854. eCollection 2019.

Economic impact of delaying initiation with multiple-inhaler maintenance triple 
therapy in Spanish patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Sicras Mainar A(1), Huerta A(2), Navarro Artieda R(3), Monsó E(4)(5), Landis 
SH(6), Ismaila AS(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Direction, Health Economics and Outcomes Research (HEOR) 
Department, Real Life Data, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Market Access Department, GlaxoSmithKline SA, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Medical Documentation Department, Hospital Germans Trias I Pujol, Badalona, 
Spain.
(4)Pulmonology Service, Hospital Parc Taulí, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)CIBERES - Ciber De Enfermedades Respiratorias, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Real World Evidence and Epidemiology Department, GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, 
UK.
(7)Value Evidence and Outcomes Department, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA, 
USA.
(8)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

PURPOSE: Guidelines recommend the use of triple therapy with an inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS), a long-acting β2 agonist (LABA) and a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) to reduce the risk of future exacerbations in 
symptomatic COPD patients with a history of exacerbations. This study aimed to 
estimate COPD-related healthcare resource use and costs, and subsequent 
exacerbation rates, for patients initiating multiple-inhaler triple therapy 
(MITT) early (≤30 days) versus late (31-180 days) following an exacerbation, in 
a real-world clinical setting.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was an observational, longitudinal, retrospective 
study using electronic medical records from the Spanish database of the Red de 
Investigación en Servicios Sanitarios Foundation. Patients ≥40 years old with a 
confirmed COPD diagnosis who were newly prescribed MITT up to 180 days after an 
exacerbation between January 2013 and December 2015 were included. Patients were 
followed from the date of MITT initiation for up to 12 months to assess 
COPD-related health care resource use (routine and emergency visits, 
hospitalizations, pharmacologic treatment), exacerbation rate, and costs 
(€2017); these endpoints were compared between early versus late groups.
RESULTS: The study included 1280 patients who met selection criteria: mean age 
73 years, 78% male, and 41% had severe/very severe lung function impairment. The 
proportion of patients initiating MITT early versus late was 61.6% versus 38.4%, 
respectively. There were no statistically significant differences in baseline 
characteristics between groups. During follow-up, health care resource 
consumption was lower in the early versus late group, especially primary care 
and ED visits, leading to lower total costs (€1861 versus €1935; P<0.05). In the 
follow-up period, 28.0% of the patients in the early group experienced ≥1 
exacerbation versus 36.4% in the late group (P=0.002), with an exacerbation rate 
of 0.5 versus 0.6 per person per year (P=0.022), respectively.
CONCLUSION: Initiating MITT early (≤30 days after an exacerbation) may reduce 
health care costs and exacerbation rate compared with late MITT initiation.

© 2019 Sicras Mainar et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S211854
PMCID: PMC6748313
PMID: 31571848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ASI is employe of, and hold stocks in, 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. ASI is also unpaid part-time faculty at McMaster 
University, ON, Canada. SHL and AH were employees of GlaxoSmithKline plc. at the 
time of the study. ASM and EM received fees for their participation in the 
study. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


205. Respir Res. 2019 Nov 12;20(1):254. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1230-8.

The matrikine acetyl-proline-glycine-proline and clinical features of COPD: 
findings from SPIROMICS.

Wells JM(1)(2)(3), Xing D(4)(5), Viera L(4)(5), Burkes RM(6)(7), Wu Y(4)(5), 
Bhatt SP(4)(5), Dransfield MT(4)(5)(8), Couper DJ(9), O'Neal W(7), Hoffman 
EA(10), Gaggar A(4)(5)(8), Barjaktarevic I(11), Curtis JL(12)(13), Labaki 
WW(12), Han MLK(12), Freeman CM(12)(13), Putcha N(14), Schlange T(15), Blalock 
JE(4)(5); SPIROMICS Investigators,.

Collaborators: Alexis NE, Anderson WH, Barr RG, Bleecker ER, Boucher RC, Bowler 
RP, Carretta EE, Christenson SA, Comellas AP, Cooper CB, Couper DJ, Criner GJ, 
Crystal RG, Curtis JL, Doerschuk CM, Dransfield MT, Freeman CM, Han MLK, Hansel 
NN, Hastie AT, Hoffman EA, Kaner RJ, Kanner RE, Kleerup EC, Krishnan JA, LaVange 
LM, Lazarus SC, Martinez FJ, Meyers DA, Newell JD Jr, Oelsner EC, O'Neal WK, 
Paine R 3rd, Putcha N, Rennard SI, Tashkin DP, Scholand MB, Wells JM, Wise RA, 
Woodruff PG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. jmwells@uabmc.edu.
(2)UAB Lung Health Center, Birmingham, AL, USA. jmwells@uabmc.edu.
(3)Birmingham VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA. jmwells@uabmc.edu.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(5)UAB Lung Health Center, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(6)Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel HillMarsico 
Lung Institute/Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(8)Birmingham VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(9)Gillings School of Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, IA, USA.
(11)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
California-Los Angeles David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(12)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan-Ann 
Arbor, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(13)VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(14)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(15)Bayer AG, AG, Pharmaceutical Division, Wuppertal, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary and systemic inflammation are central features of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Previous studies have demonstrated 
relationships between biologically active extracellular matrix components, or 
matrikines, and COPD pathogenesis. We studied the relationships between the 
matrikine acetyl-proline-glycine-proline (AcPGP) in sputum and plasma and 
clinical features of COPD.
METHODS: Sputum and plasma samples were obtained from COPD participants in the 
SPIROMICS cohort at enrollment. AcPGP was isolated using solid phase extraction 
and measured by mass spectrometry. Demographics, spirometry, quality of life 
questionnaires, and quantitative computed tomography (CT) imaging with 
parametric response mapping (PRM) were obtained at baseline. Severe COPD 
exacerbations were recorded at 1-year of prospective follow-up. We used linear 
and logistic regression models to measure associations between AcPGP and 
features of COPD, and Kaplan-Meier analyses to measure time-to-first severe 
exacerbation.
RESULTS: The 182 COPD participants in the analysis were 66 ± 8 years old, 62% 
male, 84% White race, and 39% were current smokers. AcPGP concentrations were 
0.61 ± 1.89 ng/mL (mean ± SD) in sputum and 0.60 ± 1.13 ng/mL in plasma. In 
adjusted linear regression models, sputum AcPGP was associated with FEV1/FVC, 
spirometric GOLD stage, PRM-small airways disease, and PRM-emphysema. Sputum 
AcPGP also correlated with severe AECOPD, and elevated sputum AcPGP was 
associated with shorter time-to-first severe COPD exacerbation. In contrast, 
plasma AcPGP was not associated with symptoms, pulmonary function, or severe 
exacerbation risk.
CONCLUSIONS: In COPD, sputum but not plasma AcPGP concentrations are associated 
with the severity of airflow limitation, small airways disease, emphysema, and 
risk for severe AECOPD at 1-year of follow-up.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01969344 (SPIROMICS).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1230-8
PMCID: PMC6852714
PMID: 31718676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JMW has received grant support and consulting 
fees from the NIH, GSK, AZ, Gilead, Bayer, Quintiles, Mylan, Mereo BioPharma. DX 
has no conflicts of interest. LV has no conflicts of interest. RMB has no 
conflicts of interest. YW has no conflicts of interest. SPB has received grants 
from the NIH. MTD has received grants from the NIH, American Lung Association, 
and the Department of Defense, Consulting fees from AstraZeneca, BI, GSK, Mereo, 
PneummRx/BTG and Quark, and contracted clinical trial support from AstraZeneca, 
BI, Boston Scientific, GSK, Novartis PneumRx/BTG, Pulmonx, and Yungjin. DC has 
no conflicts of interest. WO’N has no conflicts of interest. EAH has no 
conflicts of interest. AG has received grant support from the NIH and Veterans 
Administration and consulting fees from Gilead Sciences, Grifols Inc., and 
Celtaxsys Inc. IB has no conflicts of interest. JLC has received grants from 
NIH/NHLBI, NIH/NIAID, the Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of 
Defense. WWL has no conflicts of interest. MKH has no conflicts of interest. CMF 
has no conflicts of interest. NP has no conflicts of interest. TS is employed by 
Bayer AG and shareholder of Bayer AG. JEB has no conflicts of interest.


206. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Nov 27;14:2639-2647. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S216326. eCollection 2019.

Prescription Status and Clinical Outcomes of Methylxanthines and Leukotriene 
Receptor Antagonists in Mild-to-Moderate Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Lee JK(1), Rhee CK(2), Kim K(2), Ra SW(3), Lee JH(4), Jung KS(5), Yoo KH(6), Kim 
YI(7), Kim DK(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul Metropolitan Government-Seoul National University Boramae 
Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, the Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Ulsan University Hospital, University of 
Ulsan College of Medicine, Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Pulmonology and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Inje University Haeundae Paik Hospital, Inje University College of 
Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University 
College of Medicine, Anyang, Republic of Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical School, 
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Methylxanthines and leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA) are not 
a first-line medical treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
but are frequently prescribed despite limited evidence. We aimed to elucidate 
the real prescribing status and clinical impacts of these agents in early COPD 
patients.
METHODS: Patients with mild-to-moderate COPD (FEV1>50%) were selected from the 
Korean National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data between 2007 and 
2012. Besides analyzing the prescription status of methylxanthines and LTRA and 
the contributing factors to the prescription, we evaluated the clinical impacts 
of these drugs on the exacerbation, hospitalization, and medical costs.
RESULTS: Of 2269 patients with mild-to-moderate COPD, 378 patients (16.7%) were 
under medical treatments, and the users of methylxanthines and/or LTRA were 279 
patients (12.3%); however, only 139 patients (6.1%) were inhaler users. The 
contributing factors for the prescription of methylxanthines were a comorbidity 
of asthma or allergic disease, poor lung function, low quality of life, 
prescribing doctor from the specialty of internal medicine, and an institution 
type of private hospital. The prescription of LTRA was associated with the 
comorbidity of allergic disease. The methylxanthine and/or LTRA users had more 
hospital utilization but did not have significant differences in acute 
exacerbations and medical cost for hospital utilization, compared with the 
non-users.
CONCLUSION: Methylxanthines and LTRA were used in a significant proportion of 
patients with mild-to-moderate COPD in real fields without favorable impacts on 
the exacerbations, hospitalizations, or medical costs. The use of more effective 
inhaled medications should be encouraged.

© 2019 Lee et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S216326
PMCID: PMC6885559
PMID: 31819397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.K.R reports personal fees from MSD, 
AstraZeneca, GSK, Novartis, Takeda, Mundipharma, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Teva, and 
Bayer, outside of the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of 
interest in this work.


207. Lung. 2019 Apr;197(2):189-197. doi: 10.1007/s00408-019-00211-w. Epub 2019 Feb 
28.

Soluble Urokinase-Type Plasminogen Activator Receptor and Arterial Stiffness in 
Patients with COPD.

Böcskei RM(1), Benczúr B(2), Losonczy G(3), Illyés M(4), Cziráki A(4), Müller 
V(3), Bohács A(3), Bikov A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Semmelweis University, Diós árok Street. 1/c, 
Budapest, 1125, Hungary. drbocskeirenata@gmail.com.
(2)1st Dept of Internal Medicine (Cardiology/Nephrology), Balassa Janos County 
Hospital, Béri Balogh Ádám Street 5-7, Szekszárd, 7100, Hungary.
(3)Department of Pulmonology, Semmelweis University, Diós árok Street. 1/c, 
Budapest, 1125, Hungary.
(4)Heart Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Pécs, Ifjúság Street 13, 
Pecs, 7624, Hungary.

INTRODUCTION: Soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR) is 
upregulated by inflammation and plays a role in the pathogenesis of 
atherosclerosis. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with 
enhanced systemic inflammation and increased risk for atherosclerosis, however, 
studies analysing the circulating suPAR levels in COPD are contradictory. The 
aim of the study was to investigate plasma suPAR concentrations together with 
markers of arterial stiffness in COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-four patients with COPD and 18 non-COPD, control 
subjects participated in the study. Plasma suPAR was measured, together with 
lung volumes, symptom burden, exacerbation history, markers of arterial 
stiffness and soluble inflammatory biomarkers, such as endothelin-1, 
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6).
RESULTS: Plasma suPAR levels were higher in COPD (2.84 ± 0.67 ng/ml vs. 
2.41 ± 0.57 ng/ml, p = 0.03) and were related to lung function measured with 
FEV1 (r = - 0.65, p < 0.01) and symptom burden determined with the modified 
Medical Research Council questionnaire (r = 0.55, p < 0.05). Plasma suPAR 
concentrations correlated with various measures of arterial stiffness in all 
subjects, but only with ejection duration in COPD (r = - 0.44, p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma suPAR levels are elevated in COPD and relate to arterial 
stiffness. Our results suggest that suPAR may be a potential link between COPD 
and atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-019-00211-w
PMCID: PMC6486892
PMID: 30820636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Miklós Illyés is a patent 
owner of the Arteriograph method and has shares in TensioMed Ltd., a company 
that manufactures the Arteriograph device for measuring arterial stiffness. The 
other authors declare no conflict of interest. ETHICAL APPROVAL: All procedures 
performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the 
ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and 
with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later amendments or comparable 
ethical standards. INFORMED CONSENT: Informed consent was obtained from all 
individual participants included in the study.


208. Chron Respir Dis. 2020 Jan-Dec;17:1479973119895457. doi: 
10.1177/1479973119895457.

Models of care across the continuum of exacerbations for patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Bourbeau J(1), Echevarria C(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit, Research Institute of 
the McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(2)Respiratory Department, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are associated 
with significant morbidity and mortality, and treatments require a 
multidisciplinary approach to address patient needs. This review considers 
different models of care across the continuum of exacerbations (1) chronic care 
and self-management interventions with the action plan, (2) domiciliary care for 
severe exacerbation and the impact on readmission prevention and (3) the 
discharge care bundle for management beyond the acute exacerbation episode. 
Self-management strategies include written action plans and coaching with 
patient and family support. Self-management interventions facilitate the 
delivery of good care, can reduce exacerbations associated with admission, be 
cost-effective and improve quality of life. Hospitalization as a complication of 
exacerbation is not always unavoidable. Domiciliary care has been proposed as a 
solution to replace part, and perhaps even all, of the patient's in-hospital 
stay, and to reduce hospital bed days, readmission rates and costs; low-risk 
patients can be identified using risk stratification tools. A COPD discharge 
bundle is another potentially important approach that can be considered to 
improve the management of COPD exacerbations complicated by hospital admission; 
it comprised treatments that have demonstrated efficacy, such as smoking 
cessation, personalized pharmacotherapy and non-pharmacotherapy such as 
pulmonary rehabilitation. COPD bundles may also improve the transition of care 
from the hospital to the community following exacerbation and may reduce 
readmission rates. Future models of care should be personalized - providing 
patient education aiming at behaviour changes, identifying and treating 
co-morbidities, and including outcomes that measure quality of care rather than 
focusing only on readmission quantity within 30 days.

DOI: 10.1177/1479973119895457
PMCID: PMC6978821
PMID: 31970998

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


209. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 Feb;16(2):200-208. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201804-283OC.

Alignment of Inhaled Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Therapies with 
Published Strategies. Analysis of the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease Recommendations in SPIROMICS.

Ghosh S(1), Anderson WH(2), Putcha N(3), Han MK(4), Curtis JL(4), Criner GJ(5), 
Dransfield MT(6), Barr RG(7), Krishnan JA(8), Lazarus SC(9), Cooper CB(10), 
Paine R 3rd(11), Peters SP(12), Hansel NN(3), Martinez FJ(13), Drummond MB(1); 
Current and former investigators of the SPIROMICS sites and reading centers.

Collaborators: Alexis NE, Anderson WH, Barr RG, Bleecker ER, Boucher RC, Bowler 
RP, Carretta EE, Christenson SA, Comellas AP, Cooper CB, Couper DJ, Criner GJ, 
Crystal RG, Curtis JL, Doerschuk CM, Dransfield MT, Freeman CM, Han MK, Hansel 
NN, Hastie AT, Hoffman EA, Kaner RJ, Kanner RE, Kleerup EC, Krishnan JA, LaVange 
LM, Lazarus SC, Martinez FJ, Meyers DA, Moore WC, Newell JD Jr, Paulin L, Peters 
S, Oelsner EC, O'Neal WK, Ortega VE, Paine R 3rd, Putcha N, Rennard SI, Tashkin 
DP, Scholand MB, Wells JM, Wise RA, Woodruff PG, Postow L, Croxton T.

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, and.
(2)2 Marsico Lung Institute/Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, Department of 
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina.
(3)3 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)4 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(5)5 Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Lewis Katz School of Medicine 
at Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(6)6 Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(7)7 Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New 
York.
(8)8 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, University of 
Illinois, Chicago, Illinois.
(9)9 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(10)10 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(11)11 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(12)12 Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Immunologic Diseases, 
Wake Forest Baptist Health, Winston Salem, North Carolina; and.
(13)13 Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York.

Comment in
    Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 Feb;16(2):187-188.

RATIONALE: Despite awareness of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
treatment recommendations, uptake is poor. The Subpopulations and Intermediate 
Outcome Measures in COPD Study (SPIROMICS) spans 2010-2016, providing an 
opportunity to assess integration of 2011 Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung 
Disease (GOLD) treatment strategies over time in a large observational cohort 
study.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate how COPD treatment aligns with 2011 GOLD strategies and 
determine factors associated with failure to align with recommendations.
METHODS: Information on inhaled medication use collected via questionnaire 
annually for 4 years was compiled into therapeutic classes (long-acting 
antimuscarinic agent, long-acting β-agonist, inhaled corticosteroids [ICS], and 
combinations thereof). Medications were not modified by SPIROMICS investigators. 
2011 GOLD COPD categories A, B, C, and D were assigned. Alignment of inhaler 
regimen with first-/second-line GOLD recommendations was determined, stratifying 
into recommendation aligned or nonaligned. Recommendation-nonaligned 
participants were further stratified into overuse and underuse categories.
RESULTS: Of 1,721 participants with COPD, at baseline, 52% of regimens aligned 
with GOLD recommendations. Among participants with nonaligned regimens, 46% 
reported underuse, predominately owing to lack of long-acting inhalers in GOLD 
category D. Of the 54% reporting overuse, 95% were treated with nonindicated 
ICS-containing regimens. Among 431 participants with 4 years of follow-up data, 
recommendation alignment did not change over time. When we compared 2011 and 
2017 recommendations, we found that 47% did not align with either set of 
recommendations, whereas 35% were in alignment with both recommendations.
CONCLUSIONS: Among SPIROMICS participants with COPD, nearly 50% reported inhaler 
regimens that did not align with GOLD recommendations. Nonalignment was driven 
largely by overuse of ICS regimens in milder disease and lack of long-acting 
inhalers in severe disease.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201804-283OC
PMCID: PMC6376942
PMID: 30216731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Immunol Res. 2019 Apr 17;2019:7142438. doi: 10.1155/2019/7142438. eCollection 
2019.

Expressions of MMP-12, TIMP-4, and Neutrophil Elastase in PBMCs and Exhaled 
Breath Condensate in Patients with COPD and Their Relationships with Disease 
Severity and Acute Exacerbations.

Hao W(1)(2), Li M(2), Zhang Y(1), Zhang C(1), Xue Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital 
of Yan'an University, Yan'an, 716099 Shaanxi, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061 Shaanxi, China.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to compare matrix metalloproteinase-12 
(MMP-12), neutrophil elastase (NE), and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-4 
(TIMP-4) in peripheral blood of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) and controls. At the same time, MMP-12, NE, and TIMP-4 in exhaled 
breath condensate (EBC) were also evaluated.
METHODS: Peripheral blood and EBC samples from COPD patients and healthy 
controls were collected. In serum and EBC, MMP-12, NE, and TIMP-4 proteins were 
detected by enzyme-linked immunoassays. The mRNA expression levels of MMP-12, 
NE, and TIMP-4 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were analyzed by 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: The concentration of TIMP-4 protein in EBC was lower in patients with 
COPD (P < 0.001). MMP-12 (P = 0.046), NE (P = 0.027), and TIMP-4 (P = 0.005) 
proteins in serum of patients with COPD showed higher levels of concentration. 
The mRNA of MMP-12 (P = 0.0067), NE (P = 0.0058), and TIMP-4 (P = 0.0006) in 
PBMCs of COPD patients showed higher expression levels. Compared with stable 
patients, mRNA expression level of NE (P = 0.033) in PBMCs of patients with 
acute exacerbation of COPD was increased. There were differences in the ratio of 
MMP-12/TIMP-4 in PBMC (P = 0.0055), serum (P = 0.0427), and EBC (P = 0.0035) 
samples between COPD patients and healthy controls. The mRNA expression of 
MMP-12 (r = -0.3958, P = 0.0186) and NE (r = -0.3694, P = 0.0290) in COPD 
patients was negatively correlated with pulmonary function. However, the mRNA 
expression of TIMP-4 (r = 0.2871, P = 0.0945) in PBMCs was not correlated with 
the FEV1 of the pulmonary function. Serum MMP-12 level was positively correlated 
with the MMP-12 level in EBC (P = 0.0387). The level of TIMP-4 in serum was not 
correlated with the level in the EBC sample (P = 0.4332).
CONCLUSION: The expression levels of MMP-12, NE, and TIMP-4 in PBMCs and serum 
were elevated in COPD patients. In PBMCs of COPD patients, the mRNA expression 
level of NE may predict acute exacerbation, and MMP-12 mRNA expression level may 
be used to reflect the severity of airflow limitation. However, to better assess 
their diagnostic or prognostic value, larger studies are necessary.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/7142438
PMCID: PMC6501161
PMID: 31143784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Respir Med. 2020 Jan;161:105820. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.105820. Epub 2019 Nov 
15.

Factors influencing decline in quality of life in smokers without airflow 
obstruction: The COPDGene study.

Parekh TM(1), Bhatia S(2), Cherrington A(3), Kim YI(4), Lambert A(5), Iyer A(4), 
Regan EA(6), DeMeo DL(7), Han M(8), Dransfield MT(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA. Electronic address: 
trishaparekh@uabmc.edu.
(2)Institute for Cancer Outcomes and Survivorship, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, USA.
(3)Division of Preventive Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, USA.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, And Sleep Medicine, University of 
Washington, Spokane, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(9)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA; Birmingham VA Medical Center, 
Birmingham, AL, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Current and former smokers with normal spirometry and with 
Preserved Ratio Impaired Spirometry (PRISm) experience respiratory events 
similar to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. 
Exacerbations significantly reduce quality of life (QoL) in COPD patients 
however the effect of respiratory exacerbations on QoL in these groups is 
unknown. We hypothesized that exacerbations and change in exacerbation status 
would predict QoL decline among normal spirometry and PRISm participants in 
COPDGene.
METHODS: COPDGene is a multicenter, longitudinal study in the U.S. designed to 
identify genetic determinants of COPD. We enrolled study subjects in Phase 1 of 
COPDGene and performed multivariable logistic regression models to determine 
independent predictors of decline in quality of life [>4 points on the St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ)]. Separate analyses were performed for 
current and former smokers with normal spirometry and PRISm. Frequent 
exacerbator status was defined by > 2 moderate or >1 severe exacerbations in the 
year prior to the baseline and year 5 follow-up visits.
RESULTS: Independent predictors of QoL deterioration included current smoking, 
higher exacerbation frequency, and a change from infrequent to frequent 
exacerbation status (REF: infrequent to infrequent exacerbation status) in both 
groups [PRISm (OR = 3.15,95%CI, 1.67-5.94), normal spirometry (OR = 4.72,95%CI, 
3.25-6.86)]. A change from frequent to infrequent exacerbation status did not 
lower the odds of QoL decline in either cohort.
CONCLUSION: Continued smoking and the onset of frequent exacerbations were 
predictors of QoL decline in smokers with normal spirometry and PRISm. Further 
studies are needed to identify modifiable factors associated with decline in QoL 
in smokers.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.105820
PMID: 31759270

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


212. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 26;14:479-491. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S185502. eCollection 2019.

Efficacy of aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg, analyzed by airflow obstruction 
severity, age, sex, and exacerbation history: pooled analysis of ACLIFORM and 
AUGMENT.

D'Urzo AD(1), Singh D(2), Donohue JF(3), Kerwin EM(4), Ribera A(5), Molins E(5), 
Chuecos F(5), Jarreta D(5), Gil EG(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, tonydurzo@sympatico.ca.
(2)Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, 
Manchester, UK.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Diseases & Critical Care Medicine, University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, OR, USA.
(5)AstraZeneca, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 µg is a twice-daily maintenance 
bronchodilator for COPD. This post hoc study evaluated aclidinium/formoterol vs 
aclidinium 400 µg, formoterol 12 µg, or placebo in patient subgroups.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Data were pooled from two 24-week Phase III clinical 
trials (ACLIFORM and AUGMENT). Patients (N=3,394) were analyzed by baseline 
airflow obstruction severity (moderate/severe), age (<65/≥65 years), sex, and 
exacerbation history (0/≥1 exacerbation in the previous 12 months). Changes from 
baseline vs placebo and mono-therapies were evaluated: morning pre-dose (trough) 
and morning 1-hour post-dose FEV1, Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI), and 
moderate/severe exacerbation rates (healthcare resource utilization [HCRU] and 
EXAcerbations of Chronic pulmonary disease Tool [EXACT] criteria).
RESULTS: Aclidinium/formoterol improved the post-dose FEV1 vs placebo and 
monotherapy in all subgroups (all P<0.01) and trough FEV1 vs placebo (P<0.001) 
and formoterol (P<0.05) across all subgroups. Improvements in trough FEV1 were 
observed vs aclidinium in patients with severe airflow obstruction, patients 
aged <65 years, males, and patients with exacerbation history (P<0.05). 
Improvements in TDI were observed vs placebo in all subgroups (all P<0.001), 
monotherapies for patients with moderate (formoterol P<0.05) or severe airflow 
obstruction (aclidinium P<0.05), patients aged <65 years (aclidinium P<0.01, 
formoterol P<0.05), males (formoterol P<0.05), and patients with no exacerbation 
history (formoterol P<0.05). HCRU exacerbation rates were lower for 
aclidinium/formoterol vs placebo in patients with no exacerbation history 
(P<0.01). EXACT exacerbation rates were lower for aclidinium/formoterol in 
patients with moderate airflow obstruction vs placebo and aclidinium, patients 
aged <65 years vs placebo and ≥65 years vs formoterol, males vs placebo, and 
patients with no exacerbation history vs placebo (all P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Aclidinium/formoterol significantly improved post-dose FEV1, trough 
FEV1, and TDI vs placebo across all subgroups and vs monotherapy in many 
subgroups. These findings further support the benefits of aclidinium/formoterol 
for all patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S185502
PMCID: PMC6396834
PMID: 30880938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure ADD has received research, 
consulting, and lecturing fees from Almirall S.A., Altana, AstraZeneca (AZ), 
Boehringer Ingelheim (BI; Canada) Ltd., Forest Laboratories LLC, GlaxoSmithKline 
(GSK), KOS Pharmaceuticals, Merck Canada, Methapharm, Novartis ([Nov]; 
Canada/USA), ONO Pharmaceutical, Pfizer Canada, Schering-Plough, Sepracor Inc., 
and SkyePharma. DS has received sponsorship to attend international meetings, 
honoraria for lecturing or attending advisory boards, and research grants from 
various pharmaceutical companies including Apellis Pharmaceuticals, AZ, BI, 
Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A, Cipla, Genentech, Glenmark Pharmaceuticals, GSK, 
Johnson and Johnson, Mundipharma, Nov, Peptinnovate Ltd., Pfizer Inc., 
Pulmatrix, Skyepharma, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., Theravance 
Biopharma, and Verona Pharma. JFD has received consulting fees from AZ, BI, 
Circassia, GSK, and Sunovion. He is a member of the Data Monitoring Committee 
for AZ. EMK has participated in consulting, advisory boards, speaker panels, or 
received travel reimbursement from Amphastar Pharmaceuticals, AZ, Forest 
Laboratories LLC, GSK, Mylan, Nov, Oriel, Pearl Therapeutics, Sunovion, Teva 
Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., and Theravance Biopharma. He has conducted 
multicenter clinical research trials for ~40 pharmaceutical companies. AR, EM, 
FC, DJ, and EGG are employees of AZ and former employees of Almirall S.A., 
Barcelona, Spain. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


213. Chest. 2019 Oct;156(4):674-684. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.04.107. Epub 2019 May 
16.

Differences in COPD Exacerbation Risk Between Women and Men: Analysis From the 
UK Clinical Practice Research Datalink Data.

Stolz D(1), Kostikas K(2), Loefroth E(3), Fogel R(4), Gutzwiller FS(5), Conti 
V(6), Cao H(4), Clemens A(7).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Respiratory Medicine and Pulmonary Cell Research, University 
Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Clinic of Respiratory Medicine and Pulmonary Cell Research, University 
Hospital, Basel, Switzerland; Respiratory Medicine Department, University of 
Ioannina Medical School, Ioannina, Greece. Electronic address: 
ktkostikas@gmail.com.
(3)Novartis Sverige AB, Täby, Sweden.
(4)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ.
(5)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Novartis Ireland Limited, Dublin, Ireland.
(7)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland; Heart Center Freiburg University, 
Cardiology and Angiology I, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Historically, COPD has been considered to affect mostly older men 
with a history of smoking; however, in recent times, its prevalence and 
mortality rates have steadily increased among women.
OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to systematically assess differences in 
COPD expression between women and men in UK primary care clinics who were newly 
diagnosed with COPD.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study compared women and men with an incident 
diagnosis of COPD by using electronic medical records data from the Clinical 
Practice Research Datalink and linked Hospital Episode Statistics data. The 
overall study period was between January 1, 2006, and February 28, 2016; 
patients with an incident diagnosis of COPD between January 1, 2010, and 
February 28, 2015, were analyzed.
RESULTS: A cohort of 22,429 patients were identified as incident patients and 
included in the study; 48% of patients with COPD were women. The risk of first 
moderate or severe exacerbation was 17% greater in women than in men (hazard 
ratio, 1.17; 95% CI, 1.12-1.23), with a median time to first exacerbation of 
504 days for women and 637 days for men. These differences were more prominent 
in the younger age group (≥ 40 years to < 65 years), as well as in Global 
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 2016 groups B, C, and D and in 
individuals with moderate to severe airflow obstruction. The annual rate of 
moderate or severe exacerbations was higher in women compared with men in the 
first, second, and third year of follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: These results highlight the unmet need for appropriate 
identification and management of women with COPD in clinical practice.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.04.107
PMID: 31103696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 Jun;16(6):707-714. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201809-615OC.

Sex Differences in Veterans Admitted to the Hospital for Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease Exacerbation.

Bade BC(1)(2), DeRycke EC(3)(4), Ramsey C(4), Skanderson M(4), Crothers K(5), 
Haskell S(4)(6), Bean-Mayberry B(7)(8), Brandt C(3)(9), Bastian LA(4)(6), Akgün 
KM(1)(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine.
(2)2 Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine and.
(3)3 VA Connecticut Healthcare System.
(4)4 Pain Research, Informatics, Multi-morbidities, and Education Center, 
Department of Veterans Affairs, and.
(5)5 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington.
(6)6 Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut.
(7)7 Veterans Administration Center for Study of Healthcare Innovation, 
Implementation and Policy, Veterans Administration Greater Los Angeles 
Healthcare System, Los Angeles, California; and.
(8)8 Division of General Internal Medicine, UCLA David Geffen School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles, California.
(9)9 Veterans Aging Cohort Study Coordinating Center, Veterans Administration 
Connecticut Health Care System, West Haven, Connecticut.

Rationale: As chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) prevalence in women 
has outpaced that in men, COPD-related hospitalization and mortality are now 
higher in women. Presentation, evaluation, and treatment of COPD differ between 
women and men. Despite higher smoking rates in Veterans, little work has 
characterized differences in Veterans with COPD by sex. Objectives: To determine 
risk factors for 30-day readmission among Veterans hospitalized for COPD 
exacerbations and how they differed by sex. Methods: We performed a 
retrospective observational analysis of Veterans receiving primary care in 
Veterans Health Affairs facilities. We included Veterans Administration-based 
hospitalizations for Veterans with a COPD exacerbation (identified by 
International Classification of Disease, Ninth Revision codes) who survived to 
discharge between fiscal years 2012 and 2015. Primary outcome was 30-day 
readmission. Predictors ascertained before hospitalization included smoking 
status (current, former, never), pulmonary function testing, pulmonary 
medication prescriptions, and medical and psychiatric comorbidities (identified 
by International Classification of Disease, ninth revision codes). We created 
combined and sex-stratified multivariate logistic regression models to identify 
associations with 30-day readmission. Results: Our sample included 48,888 
Veterans (4% women). Compared with men, women Veterans were younger, more likely 
to be nonwhite, and differed in smoking status. Women were more likely to have 
asthma, drug use, and several psychiatric comorbidities. Before hospitalization, 
women were less likely to have pulmonary function testing (76% vs. 78%; 
P = 0.01) or be treated with antimuscarinic (43% vs. 48%) or combined 
long-acting bronchodilator/inhaled corticosteroid (61% vs. 64%) inhalers. Women 
were more likely to receive nicotine-replacement therapy (all P < 0.01). Women 
had shorter length of stay (median days, 2 vs. 3; P = 0.04) and lower 30-day 
readmission rate (20% vs. 22%; P = 0.01). In adjusted models including both 
sexes, age, antimuscarinic use, comorbidities, and diagnosis of drug or alcohol 
use were associated with readmission; there was no association with sex and 
readmission risk. In models stratified by sex, associations were similar between 
women and men. Conclusions: This study suggests differences between women and 
men hospitalized for COPD regarding presentation, evaluation, and management. 
Readmission is strongly influenced by comorbidities, suggesting individualized 
and comprehensive case management may reduce readmission risk for women and men 
with COPD.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201809-615OC
PMCID: PMC6543475
PMID: 30822098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2019 Feb;32(1):24-33. doi: 
10.1089/jamp.2018.1477. Epub 2018 Nov 17.

Satisfaction with the Use of eFlow Closed-System Nebulizer in Patients with 
Moderate-to-Very Severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Findings from a 
Long-Term Safety Study.

Kerwin EM(1), Donohue JF(2), Ferguson GT(3), Ganapathy V(4), Ozol-Godfrey A(4), 
Rajagopalan K(4).

Author information:
(1)1 Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, Medford, Oregon.
(2)2 University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina.
(3)3 Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, 
Michigan.
(4)4 Sunovion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Marlborough, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Effective delivery of inhaled drugs in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) depends on patients' ability to correctly use an inhalation 
device. Nebulized delivery may be appropriate for COPD patients who cannot 
coordinate breath with inhalation or generate adequate inhalational force. Until 
recently, long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), used for maintenance 
treatment of COPD, were available for delivery only via handheld inhalers. 
Lonhala™ Magnair™ (glycopyrrolate inhalation solution) is a LAMA delivered via 
the eFlow® closed-system (eFlow CS) vibrating membrane nebulizer. We assessed 
patient-reported ease of use and satisfaction with the eFlow CS nebulizer in the 
GOLDEN (Glycopyrrolate for Obstructive Lung Disease via Electronic Nebulizer)-5 
study.
METHODS: GOLDEN-5, a phase 3, randomized, open-label trial, evaluated the safety 
and efficacy of glycopyrrolate/eFlow CS 50 μg twice daily versus tiotropium 
18 μg once daily (administered via HandiHaler™) in patients with 
moderate-to-very severe COPD. Only patients in the glycopyrrolate/eFlow CS group 
completed a study-specific device use questionnaire, evaluating patients' 
perceptions about ease of use, confidence in drug delivery, and overall device 
satisfaction at week 48 or end of study. Responses were summarized by counts and 
percentages.
RESULTS: Of 620 patients who received glycopyrrolate/eFlow CS, 454 completed the 
questionnaire (mean age [standard deviation, SD] 63.3 [8.5] years; mean BMI [SD] 
28.45 [6.208] kg/m2). Based on patient-reported perceptions, most patients (83%) 
were "confident" to "very confident" that the drug was delivered into their 
lungs with the eFlow CS; >70% rated the eFlow CS as "easy" or "very easy" to 
assemble, operate, and clean. Most (75%) patients ranked themselves as being 
"satisfied" or "very satisfied" overall with the eFlow CS nebulizer.
CONCLUSIONS: High levels of satisfaction, confidence, and ease of use were 
reported with the eFlow CS nebulizer in this study. These findings support the 
use of the eFlow CS for maintenance treatment of COPD with glycopyrrolate 
inhalation solution.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2018.1477
PMID: 30457433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Biochem Med (Zagreb). 2020 Feb 15;30(1):010701. doi: 10.11613/BM.2020.010701. 
Epub 2019 Dec 15.

Platelet indices in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - association 
with inflammatory markers, comorbidities and therapy.

Hlapčić I(1), Somborac-Bačura A(1), Popović-Grle S(2)(3), Vukić Dugac A(2)(3), 
Rogić D(1)(4), Rako I(4), Žanić Grubišić T(1), Rumora L(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Zagreb, Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Department of 
Medical Biochemistry and Haematology, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Clinical Department for Lung Diseases 
Jordanovac, Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)University of Zagreb, School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Clinical Institute of Laboratory 
Diagnostics, Zagreb, Croatia.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a complex 
inflammatory condition that can affect haemostasis. This study aimed to 
determine differences in platelet-related parameters between controls and COPD 
subjects. The hypothesis was that platelet indices are disturbed in COPD 
patients, and this would be accompanied by increased C-reactive protein (CRP), 
fibrinogen (Fbg) and white blood cells (WBC). Therefore, platelet count (Plt), 
platelet-related parameters - mean platelet volume (MPV), platelet distribution 
width (PDW), plateletcrit (Pct), their ratios (MPV/Plt, MPV/Pct, PDW/Plt, 
PDW/Pct), platelet to lymphocyte ratio (PLR), Plt index as well as CRP, Fbg and 
WBC were assessed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Study included 109 patients with stable COPD and 95 
control subjects, recruited at Clinical Department for Lung Diseases Jordanovac, 
University Hospital Centre Zagreb (Zagreb, Croatia). Complete blood count was 
performed on Sysmex XN-1000, CRP on Cobas c501, and Fbg on BCS XP analyser. Data 
were analysed with MedCalc statistical software.
RESULTS: Platelet (P = 0.007) and PLR (P = 0.006) were increased, while other 
platelet indices were decreased in COPD patients compared to controls. Combined 
model that included PLR, PDW and WBC showed great diagnostic performances, and 
correctly classified 75% of cases with an AUC of 0.845 (0.788 - 0.892), P < 
0.001. Comorbidities (cardiovascular or metabolic diseases) had no effect on 
investigated parameters, while inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting β2-agonists 
(ICS/LABA) therapy increased MPV and PDW values in COPD patients.
CONCLUSION: Platelet indices were altered in COPD patients and they could be 
valuable as diagnostic markers of COPD development, especially if combined with 
already known inflammatory markers.

Croatian Society of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Medicine.

DOI: 10.11613/BM.2020.010701
PMCID: PMC6904969
PMID: 31839721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflict of interest: None declared.


217. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2020 Mar;14(3):239-247. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2020.1703676. Epub 2019 Dec 25.

Revefenacin for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Clark CM(1)(2), Jacobs DM(1), Sethi S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, Primary Care Research Institute, Jacobs School 
of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Clinical and Translational Research Center, Jacobs 
School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 
USA.

Introduction: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive 
condition characterized by irreversible or incompletely reversible airflow 
limitation. Long-acting bronchodilators, including β2 agonists (LABA) and 
muscarinic antagonists (LAMA), serve as the standard of care for maintenance 
therapy in COPD. Individualizing therapy to optimize selection of delivery 
device has the potential to improve medication adherence and clinical outcomes 
among COPD patients.Areas covered: Revefenacin (Yupelri) is the only LAMA 
approved for once-daily administration via standard jet nebulizer for the 
maintenance therapy in patients with COPD. Revefenacin has a unique biphenyl 
carbamate tertiary amine structure, differing from the quaternary amine 
structure of previously approved LAMAs. Here we summarize the available clinical 
data for this new agent and discuss its potential place in the treatment of 
COPD.Expert opinion: Based on available clinical trial data, revefenacin appears 
to be an effective and safe option for long-term maintenance therapy of COPD. 
Revefenacin offers a once-daily option for LAMA therapy for patients who prefer 
or require nebulized drug delivery. The availability of this agent can allow 
patients to combine nebulized therapies that could improve clinical outcomes in 
appropriately selected patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2020.1703676
PMID: 31847629


218. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jun 6;14:1251-1265. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S191845. eCollection 2019.

Evidence-based review of data on the combination inhaler umeclidinium/vilanterol 
in patients with COPD.

Albertson TE(1)(2), Bowman WS(1)(2), Harper RW(1)(2), Godbout RM(2)(3), Murin 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and 
Sleep Medicine, UC Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs, Northern California Health Care System, 
Mather, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of General Medicine, UC Davis, 
Sacramento, CA, USA.

The use of inhaled, fixed-dose, long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) 
combined with long-acting, beta2-adrenergic receptor agonists (LABA) has become 
a mainstay in the maintenance treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). One of the fixed-dose LAMA/LABA combinations is the dry powder inhaler 
(DPI) of umeclidinium bromide (UMEC) and vilanterol trifenatate (VI) (62.5 µg/25 
µg) approved for once-a-day maintenance treatment of COPD. This paper reviews 
the use of fixed-dose combination LAMA/LABA agents focusing on the UMEC/VI DPI 
inhaler in the maintenance treatment of COPD. The fixed-dose combination 
LAMA/LABA inhaler offers a step beyond a single inhaled maintenance agent but is 
still a single device for the COPD patient having frequent COPD exacerbations 
and persistent symptoms not well controlled on one agent. Currently available 
clinical trials suggest that the once-a-day DPI of UMEC/VI is well-tolerated, 
safe and non-inferior or better than other currently available inhaled 
fixed-dose LAMA/LABA combinations for COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S191845
PMCID: PMC6559138
PMID: 31239659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


219. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Oct 8;14:2305-2318. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S203709. eCollection 2019.

Pharmacokinetics and safety of revefenacin in subjects with impaired renal or 
hepatic function.

Borin MT(1), Lo A(2), Barnes CN(3), Pendyala S(4), Bourdet DL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Translational Pharmacology, Theravance Biopharma 
US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Theravance Biopharma US, 
Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical Development, Inflammation and Immunology, Theravance 
Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.

PURPOSE: Revefenacin, a long-acting muscarinic antagonist for nebulization, has 
been shown to improve lung function in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. Here we report pharmacokinetic (PK) and safety results from 
two multicenter, open-label, single-dose trials evaluating revefenacin in 
subjects with severe renal impairment (NCT02578082) and moderate hepatic 
impairment (NCT02581592).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The renal impairment trial enrolled subjects with normal 
renal function and severe renal impairment (estimated glomerular filtration rate 
<30 mL/min/1.73 m2). The hepatic impairment trial enrolled subjects with normal 
hepatic function and moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class B). Subjects 
received a single 175-µg dose of revefenacin through nebulization. PK plasma 
samples and urine collections were obtained at multiple time points for 5 days 
following treatment; all subjects were monitored for adverse events.
RESULTS: In the renal impairment study, the maximum observed plasma revefenacin 
concentration (Cmax) was up to 2.3-fold higher and area under the 
concentration-time curve from time 0 to infinity (AUCinf) was up to 2.4-fold 
higher in subjects with severe renal impairment compared with those with normal 
renal function. For THRX-195518, the major metabolite of revefenacin, the 
corresponding changes in Cmax and AUCinf were 1.8- and 2.7-fold higher, 
respectively. In the hepatic impairment study, revefenacin Cmax and AUCinf were 
1.03- and 1.18-fold higher, respectively, in subjects with moderate hepatic 
impairment compared with those with normal hepatic function. The corresponding 
changes in THRX-195518 Cmax and AUCinf were 1.5- and 2.8-fold higher, 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Systemic exposure to revefenacin increased modestly in subjects with 
severe renal impairment but was similar between subjects with moderate hepatic 
impairment and normal hepatic function. The increase in plasma exposure to 
THRX-195518 in subjects with severe renal or moderate hepatic impairment is 
unlikely to be of clinical consequence given its low antimuscarinic potency, low 
systemic levels after inhaled revefenacin administration, and favorable safety 
profile.

© 2019 Borin et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S203709
PMCID: PMC6790214
PMID: 31632000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MTB is a consultant for Theravance Biopharma US, 
Inc. AL and DLB are employees of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. CNB and SP were 
employees of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. at the time this study was conducted. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


220. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 24;14(1):e0210915. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210915. 
eCollection 2019.

ACO: Time to move from the description of different phenotypes to the treatable 
traits.

Toledo-Pons N(1)(2), van Boven JFM(3), Román-Rodríguez M(4), Pérez N(5), Valera 
Felices JL(2), Soriano JB(6)(7), Cosío BG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CIBER Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Universitari Son Espases-IdISBa, 
Mallorca, Spain.
(3)Department of General Practice & Elderly Care Medicine, Groningen Research 
Institute for Asthma and COPD (GRIAC), University Medical Centre Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Primary Care respiratory research unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
de las Islas Baleares (IdISBa), Mallorca, Spain.
(5)Gabinete Técnico Servicios Centrales, Servicio de Salud de las Islas 
Baleares, Mallorca, Spain.
(6)Hopital Universitario de la Princesa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, 
Spain.
(7)Consultor de Metodología e Investigación de SEPAR, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Asthma-COPD overlap (ACO) is a term that encompasses patients with 
characteristics of two conditions, smoking asthmatics or COPD patients with 
asthma-like features such as high bronchodilator response or blood eosinophil 
count ≥300 cells/μL. The aim of this study was to compare the different 
phenotypes inside the ACO definition in a real-life population cohort.
METHODS: We analyzed patients from the MAJORICA cohort who had a diagnosis of 
asthma and/or COPD based on current guidelines, laboratory data in 2014 and 
follow-up until 2015. Prevalence of ACO according to the different criteria, 
demographic, clinical and functional characteristics, prescriptions and use of 
health resources data were compared between three groups.
RESULTS: We included 603 patients. Prevalence of smoking asthmatics was 14%, 
COPD patients with high bronchodilator response 1.5% and eosinophilic COPD 
patients 12%. Smoking asthmatics were younger and used more rescue inhalers, 
corticosteroids and health resources. Conversely, eosinophilic COPD patients 
were older than the other groups, often treated with corticosteroids and had 
lower use of health resources. Most of the COPD patients with high 
bronchodilator response were included in the eosinophilic COPD group.
CONCLUSIONS: ACO includes two conditions (smoking asthmatics and eosinophilic 
COPD patients) with different medication requirement and prognosis that should 
not be pooled together. Use of ≥300 blood eosinophils/μL as a treatable trait 
should be recommended.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210915
PMCID: PMC6345463
PMID: 30677059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We have read the journal’s policy and the 
authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: B. G. C. has 
received speaker fees from Sanofi, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
Teva, Mundipharma and Menarini, outside the submitted work. M. R.-R. has 
received personal fees from Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Mundipharma, 
Novartis, and TEVA, and grants and personal fees from GSK, outside the submitted 
work. None declared (J. F. M. v. B., J.L.V., N. T.-P., N.P. and J. B. S.). This 
does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


221. Clin Ther. 2019 Nov;41(11):2283-2296. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2019.09.001. Epub 
2019 Oct 17.

Reduction in Hospital Readmission Rates Among Medicare Beneficiaries With 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Real-world Outcomes Study of Nebulized 
Bronchodilators.

Keshishian A(1), Xie L(1), Dembek C(2), Yuce H(3).

Author information:
(1)STATinMED Research, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc, 
Marlborough, MA, USA. Electronic address: carole.dembek@sunovion.com.
(3)New York College of Technology, City University of New York, Brooklyn, NY, 
USA.

PURPOSE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common condition 
responsible for substantial morbidity, mortality, and costs in the United 
States. The economic burden of COPD is driven primarily by hospitalizations, 
with 1 in 5 hospitalized patients experiencing a 30-day readmission. 
Bronchodilators, delivered via handheld inhalers or nebulizers, are the mainstay 
of therapy for COPD. However, differences in outcomes between short- and 
long-acting therapies are unclear. We examined real-world differences in 30-day 
readmission and exacerbation rates between Medicare beneficiaries with COPD 
treated with a nebulized long-acting beta2-agonist (arformoterol tartrate [ARF]) 
and beneficiaries treated with a nebulized short-acting beta2-agonist (SABA) for 
maintenance therapy after hospital discharge.
METHODS: Truven MarketScan Hospital Drug Database and Medicare files were 
probabilistically matched between 2009 and 2013 to identify beneficiaries who 
were aged ≥65 years and discharged from a hospital with a primary COPD diagnosis 
or a secondary COPD diagnosis and a primary diagnosis for another respiratory 
condition. Matching was performed by using COPD hospitalization date (±7 days) 
and source, length of stay (±1 day), discharge date and destination, and 
hospital region. After applying additional inclusion/exclusion criteria, 2 
cohorts were created: nebulized ARF users (n = 953) and nebulized SABA users 
(n = 6939). Logistic regression analyses were used to examine 30-day readmission 
(all-cause and COPD related) and exacerbation rates. Odds ratios (ORs), 95% CIs, 
and P values were computed.
FINDINGS: On average, nebulized SABA users had more comorbidities than nebulized 
ARF users, including diabetes, atrial fibrillation, renal disease, 
musculoskeletal disease, myocardial infarction, and cognitive impairment (all, 
P < 0.0001). However, nebulized ARF users had a higher average COPD severity 
score than nebulized SABA users (49.5 v. 38.0; P < 0.001). COPD therapies at 
baseline were similar in both cohorts and included systemic corticosteroids 
(≥65%), short-acting bronchodilators (≥33%), and inhaled 
corticosteroids + long-acting beta2-agonists (30%). After adjusting for 
sociodemographic and hospital characteristics, concomitant medications, and 
case-mix, nebulized ARF users had 27% lower odds of an all-cause readmission 
(OR, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.59-0.92; P = 0.008) and 23% lower odds of a COPD-related 
readmission (OR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.60-0.98; P = 0.032) at 30 days compared with 
users of a nebulized SABA. No difference was found in 30-day exacerbation rates 
between the cohorts.
IMPLICATIONS: Nebulized ARF users had lower 30-day readmission rates, greater 
COPD severity, and fewer comorbidities than nebulized SABA users. In this 
population, maintenance treatment with ARF reduced costly COPD outcomes.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2019.09.001
PMID: 31630815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;13:1753466619850725. doi: 
10.1177/1753466619850725.

Aclidinium bromide in fixed-dose combination with formoterol fumarate in the 
management of COPD: an update on the evidence base.

D'Urzo AD(1), Singh D(2), Donohue JF(3), Chapman KR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON 12354, Canada.
(2)Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester University NHS Foundations Trust, 
Manchester, UK.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
North Carolina Pulmonary Critical Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Asthma and Airway Center, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Aclidinium bromide/formoterol fumarate (AB/FF) 400/12 µg is a twice-daily 
long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist and long-acting β2 agonist 
(LAMA/LABA) dual-bronchodilator maintenance therapy used to relieve symptoms and 
reduce future risk of exacerbations in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). To date, there have been several clinical studies and post hoc 
analyses of AB/FF, assessing treatment outcomes in patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD. These studies have looked at a range of outcomes, 
including lung function parameters, patient-reported symptom scores, 
quality-of-life measures assessing impaired health and perceived well-being, and 
the frequency, duration, and severity of exacerbations. In light of the major 
2017 revision to the Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) recommendations, and the subsequent updates, we present an update on the 
latest evidence supporting the efficacy and safety of AB/FF. This review 
discusses the clinical relevance of the improvements in lung function, symptoms, 
quality of life, and exacerbations in patients with COPD reported in the phase 
III and IV trials of AB/FF. Given the current concerns over unnecessary inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) use in COPD, we also touch briefly on the use of blood 
eosinophils as a biomarker for identifying those patients with COPD already 
using LAMA/LABA therapy for whom the addition of ICS might be of benefit.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466619850725
PMCID: PMC6535700
PMID: 31096854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: AD has received 
research, consulting, and lecturing fees from Almirall, Altana, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, KOS 
Pharmaceuticals, Merck Canada, Methapharm, Novartis Canada/USA, ONO 
Pharmaceutical Co., Pfizer Canada, Schering-Plough, Sepracor, and SkyePharma. DS 
has received sponsorship to attend international meetings, honoraria for 
lecturing or attending advisory boards and research grants from various 
pharmaceutical companies including Apellis, Astra-Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Cipla, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, Johnson and Johnson, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Peptin-novate, Pfizer, Pulmatrix, SkyPharma, Teva, 
Theravance, and Verona. JFD has received consulting fees from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Sunovian, and Theravance. He is 
a member of the Data Monitoring Committee for AstraZeneca, Gilead, and InsMED. 
KRC has consulted (in the last 3 years) with AstraZeneca, Baxter, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, CSL Behring, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Kamada, Novartis, Roche, and 
Teva; has undertaken research funded by Amgen, AstraZeneca, Baxter, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, CSL Behring, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Mereo 
BioPharma, Novartis, Regeneron, Roche, and Sanofi; and has participated in 
continuing medical education activities sponsored in whole or in part by 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Glaxo-SmithKline, Grifols, Merck Frosst, 
Novartis, and Pfizer. He is also participating in research funded by the 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research operating grant [entitled ‘Canadian 
Cohort Obstructive Lung Disease (CanCOLD)’] and holds the GSK-CIHR Research 
Chair in Respiratory Health Care Delivery at the University Health Network, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.


223. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Feb 15;14:431-437. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S188710. eCollection 2019.

No impact of exacerbation frequency and severity on the physical activity 
decline in COPD: a long-term observation.

Sievi NA(1), Kohler M(1), Thurnheer R(2), Leuppi JD(3), Irani S(4), Frey M(5), 
Brutsche M(6), Brack T(7), Clarenbach CF(1).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Division, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 
christian.clarenbach@usz.ch.
(2)Pulmonary Division, Cantonal Hospital of Münsterlingen, Münsterlingen, 
Switzerland.
(3)University Clinic of Medicine, Cantonal Hospital Baselland and University of 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Pulmonary Division, Cantonal Hospital of Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland.
(5)Pulmonary Division, Clinic Barmelweid, Barmelweid, Switzerland.
(6)Pulmonary Division, Cantonal Hospital of St Gallen, St Gallen, Switzerland.
(7)Pulmonary Division, Cantonal Hospital of Glarus, Glarus, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: COPD exacerbations are associated with a concomitant profound 
reduction in daily physical activity (PA). Thereby, exacerbation frequency and 
severity may have an amplifying effect. Whether the reduced level of PA returns 
to the level prior to exacerbation or has a sustained negative impact on 
activity behavior over time is unclear.
METHODS: The number of steps per day over 1 week, as a measure of daily PA, was 
assessed annually in a cohort of patients with COPD. Exacerbation frequency and 
severity were documented. Uni- and multivariate mixed effect models were used to 
investigate associations between change in number of steps per day (dependent 
variable) and exacerbations. Stratification by possible confounders was 
performed.
RESULTS: One hundred and eighty one COPD patients (median [quartile] age 64 
[59/69] years, 65% male, median [quartiles] FEV1 % pred. 46 [33/65]) suffered a 
total of 273 exacerbations during the observation period (median [quartiles] 
follow-up time of 2.1 [1.6/3.1] years). Neither the frequency nor the severity 
of exacerbations was significantly related to the overall decline in PA over 
time. Stratification by different possible confounders such as age, sex and 
disease severity did not yield a subgroup in which exacerbations enhance the 
decrease in PA over time.
CONCLUSION: The drop in PA during the phase of an acute exacerbation seems not 
to be a lasting phenomenon leading to a fundamental change in activity behavior.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: www.ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01527773.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S188710
PMCID: PMC6388775
PMID: 30863043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


224. Postgrad Med. 2020 Mar;132(2):126-131. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1706996. Epub 
2020 Jan 11.

Pharmacological treatment of stable COPD: need for a simplified approach.

Hillas G(1), Papaporfyriou A(2), Dimakou K(1), Papaioannou AI(2).

Author information:
(1)5th Pulmonary Department, "Sotiria" Chest Diseases Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(2)2nd Respiratory Medicine Department, University of Athens, Attikon Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the most common diseases 
worldwide. Although different guidelines regarding therapeutic algorithms exist, 
the most widely adopted approach is the one suggested by the Global Initiative 
in Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease in which patients are stratified according 
to their dyspnea severity and their exacerbation history during the previous 
year. This combined assessment of COPD, which takes into consideration all 
aforementioned characteristics of COPD patients as well as the number of blood 
eosinophils, results in a proposed therapeutic algorithm which is complex and 
hard to memorize. This complexity is probable one of the causes that most health 
care professionals are not adherent to the guidelines when treating COPD 
patients. Here, we propose a simplified therapeutic algorithm for the treatment 
of COPD patients taking into consideration the current evidence on the use of 
bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2019.1706996
PMID: 31852408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. COPD. 2020 Feb;17(1):112-119. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1702010. Epub 2019 Dec 
13.

Emerging Treatments for COPD: Evidence to Date on Revefenacin.

Lal C(1), Khan A(2).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the 4th leading cause of death 
in the United States. Due to the substantial public health burden of COPD, there 
has been a lot of interest in developing new drug therapies, directed at 
improving the symptomatology and quality of life in COPD patients. Revefenacin 
is the first once daily nebulized long acting muscarinic antagonist for COPD 
treatment. It offers an advantage over other nebulized bronchodilators, as once 
daily administration may improve patient compliance. Revefenacin has a rapid 
onset of action, is long acting and significantly improves lung function (FEV1) 
in patients with COPD. It can play a major role in the management of COPD, 
especially in patients who have difficulty mastering inhaler techniques and 
those with low baseline FEV1 who may have difficulty generating flow with an 
inhaler. This manuscript is a review on revefenacin and outlines the 
pharmacologic profile and the clinical trials which have evaluated it's the 
efficacy and safety. The authors also discuss their own perspective on the 
potential role of revefenacin in COPD management.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1702010
PMID: 31833419


226. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 16;14:2905-2915. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S222762. eCollection 2019.

Impact of Therapy Persistence on Exacerbations and Resource Use in Patients Who 
Initiated COPD Therapy.

Dalon F(1), Devouassoux G(2)(3), Belhassen M(1)(4), Nachbaur G(5), Correia Da 
Silva C(5), Sail L(5), Jacoud F(1), Chouaid C(6), Van Ganse E(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)PELyon, PharmacoEpidemiology, Lyon, France.
(2)Pulmonary Department, Hôpital de la Croix Rousse, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 
Lyon, France.
(3)EA 7426, PI3, Inflammation & Immunité de L'épithélium Respiratoire, 
Université Claude-Bernard-Lyon1, Lyon, France.
(4)EA 7425 HESPER Health Services and Performance Research, Université 
Claude-Bernard-Lyon1, Lyon, France.
(5)GlaxoSmithKline France, Pharmaco Epidemiology and Health Economics and 
Outcomes Research, Rueil-Malmaison, France.
(6)Pulmonary Department, CHI de Créteil, Créteil, France.

PURPOSE: This study assessed therapy persistence in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in France, and the impact of 
non-persistence on exacerbations and described COPD-related healthcare resource 
use (HRU).
METHODS: Patients aged ≥45 years who received ≥1 dispensed bronchodilator per 
quarter over three consecutive quarters between 2007 and 2014 and initiated 
specific COPD therapy were selected from the Echantillon Généraliste des 
Bénéficiaires (EGB) database. Persistence, defined as the absence of dispensing 
gaps of >90 days, was measured at 12 months. Exacerbations were compared between 
persistent and non-persistent patients during follow-up after patient matching 
and adjustment for confounding factors. COPD-related HRU during follow-up was 
described.
RESULTS: Among 4020 patients with COPD, 2164 initiated a specific therapy. Of 
these, 54.4% stopped treatment within 12 months. Persistence with all COPD 
therapy regimens was low, particularly for inhaled corticosteroid (ICS; 25.6%) 
and ICS/twice-daily long-acting beta-agonist (39.4%) regimens. Among 721 
persistent patients who were matched with 721 non-persistent patients, there was 
no difference in the number of moderate or severe exacerbations at 12 months. 
However, medical procedures (for instance, pulmonary function testing and chest 
X-rays) were more frequently observed among persistent patients than among 
non-persistent patients, suggesting worse disease severity.
CONCLUSION: Patients receiving specific treatment(s) for COPD demonstrated low 
persistence for all examined therapy regimens, with no clear impact of 
persistence status on the frequency of exacerbations at 12 months.

© 2019 Dalon et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S222762
PMCID: PMC6927267
PMID: 31908439

Conflict of interest statement: GN, and LS are employees of GlaxoSmithKline 
(GSK) and own stock in GSK. CCDS was an employee of GSK at the time of the 
study. EVG is Scientific Advisor for PELyon and has had work sponsored by GSK, 
during the conduct of the study. FJ, FD, and MB (employees of PELyon) conducted 
the study through sponsorship by GSK and were not paid for manuscript 
development. CC reports personal fees from GSK, AZ, Novartis, during the conduct 
of the study. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


227. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;13:1753466619894502. doi: 
10.1177/1753466619894502.

Systematic review and network meta-analysis of the efficacy and safety of 
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler in comparison with other 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting β(2)-agonist fixed-dose 
combinations in COPD.

Siddiqui MK(1), Shukla P(2), Jenkins M(3), Ouwens M(4), Guranlioglu D(3), Darken 
P(5), Biswas M(6).

Author information:
(1)Parexel International, Punjab, India.
(2)Formerly of Parexel International, Punjab, India.
(3)AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(4)AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(6)AstraZeneca 101 Orchard Ridge Dr, Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dual bronchodilation with a long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA)/long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) fixed-dose combination (FDC) is an 
established treatment strategy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
The relative efficacy and safety of glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered 
dose inhaler (GFF MDI 18/9.6 μg) in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD, 
compared with other licensed LAMA/LABA FDCs, was investigated using an 
integrated Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA).
METHODS: A systematic literature review and subsequent screening process 
identified randomized controlled trials of ⩾10 weeks' duration that enrolled 
patients aged ⩾40 years with moderate-to-very severe COPD and included at least 
one LAMA/LABA FDC or open LAMA + LABA treatment arm. NMAs were conducted for 
outcomes including change from baseline in forced expiratory volume in 1 s 
(FEV1), St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), and transition dyspnea 
index (TDI) parameters, annualized rate of exacerbations, use of rescue 
medication, adverse events, and all-cause withdrawals. Meta-regression and 
sensitivity analyses accounted for heterogeneity across studies.
RESULTS: In total, 29 studies including 34,617 patients contributed to the NMA 
for efficacy or safety outcomes at week 24 or exacerbations. For all LAMA/LABA 
FDCs with data available, significantly greater improvements in FEV1 [trough, 
peak, and area under the curve (AUC)0-4], SGRQ total score and TDI focal score 
at week 24, and annualized rate of moderate-to-severe exacerbations, were 
observed versus placebo. Where indirect comparisons were possible, differences 
between GFF MDI and other LAMA/LABA FDCs were small relative to established 
margins of clinical relevance, and not statistically significant. The safety and 
tolerability profile of GFF MDI was consistent with other LAMA/LABA FDCs and 
placebo. The results of the meta-regression were generally similar to the base 
case.
CONCLUSIONS: GFF MDI demonstrated comparable efficacy and safety outcomes to 
other LAMA/LABA FDCs. Personalization of treatment choice within the class on 
the basis of other factors such as patient preference may be appropriate.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466619894502
PMCID: PMC6928544
PMID: 31868101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: MKS is an 
employee of Parexel, and PS is a former employee of Parexel, the organization 
that received funding from AstraZeneca to perform the systematic literature 
review and network meta-analysis. MJ, MO, DG, PD, and MB are employees of 
AstraZeneca. MJ, DG, and PD hold stock or stock options in AstraZeneca.


228. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 26;14:2219-2227. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S209273. eCollection 2019.

Inhaled Corticosteroids And Risk Of Tuberculosis In Patients With Obstructive 
Lung Diseases: A Systematic Review And Meta-Analysis Of Non-randomized Studies.

Castellana G(#)(1), Castellana M(#)(2), Castellana C(3), Castellana G(4), Resta 
E(5), Carone M(1), Resta O(6).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Division, Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri SpA SB Pavia, IRCCS 
Cassano Murge, Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, Section of Internal 
Medicine, Endocrinology, Andrology and Metabolic Diseases, University of Bari 
Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy.
(3)University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy.
(4)Pulmonary Division, District Health Center ASL Bari, Conversano, Italy.
(5)University of Italian Switzerland, Lugano, Switzerland.
(6)Cardio-Thoracic Department, Institute of Respiratory Diseases, University of 
Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: An association between systemic corticosteroids and tuberculosis 
(TB) is reported in the literature. Here within, we conducted a systematic 
review and meta-analysis to evaluate the effects of inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS) on the risk of TB in patients with obstructive lung diseases.
METHODS: The review was registered on PROSPERO (CRD42018095874). PubMed, 
CENTRAL, Scopus and Web of Science were searched from inception to September 
2018. Papers reporting cases of incident TB in patients with obstructive lung 
diseases were included; studies without data on ICS use were excluded. 
Simultaneous use of oral corticosteroids (OCS) and population attributable 
fraction (PAF) for TB from ICS exposure were also assessed. Data were analyzed 
using a generic inverse variance method with a random-effects model. ORs with 
95% CI were estimated.
RESULTS: Out of 4044 retrieved papers, 9 articles evaluating adult patients only 
were included in the review. 36,351 patients were prescribed ICS, while 147,171 
were not. Any ICS use was associated with an increased risk of TB versus no ICS 
use (OR=1.46; 95% CI 1.06 to 2.01; p=0.02; I2=96%). A similar result was also 
found for current ICS use versus prior/no ICS use, as well as for high, moderate 
and low ICS dose versus no ICS. When simultaneous OCS use was evaluated, the 
independent contribution of ICS was confirmed only in patients not on OCS 
(OR=1.63; 95% CI 1.05 to 2.52; p=0.03; I2=94%). Only 0.49% of all TB cases could 
be attributable to ICS exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the association between ICS and TB, the contribution of 
this risk factor to the epidemiology of TB seems to be limited. As a 
consequence, no population-based interventions are warranted. Rather, this risk 
should be taken into account on an individual basis, particularly in those 
patients with a high risk of progression from LTBI to TB.

© 2019 Castellana et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S209273
PMCID: PMC6769028
PMID: 31576118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


229. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2020 Jan-Dec;14:1753466620905278. doi: 
10.1177/1753466620905278.

Efficacy and safety of revefenacin for nebulization in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease taking concomitant ICS/LABA or LABA: subgroup 
analysis from phase III trials.

Sethi S(1), Donohue JF(2), Ferguson GT(3), Barnes CN(4), Crater GD(5).

Author information:
(1)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

BACKGROUND: Combinations of a long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist (LAMA), 
long-acting β-agonist (LABA), and inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) are used for 
patients with persistent chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
exacerbations on bronchodilator monotherapy. In this prespecified subgroup 
analysis, we assessed the efficacy and safety of the LAMA revefenacin in 
patients with COPD taking concomitant LABA, including ICS/LABA (LABA subgroup).
METHODS: Efficacy data were obtained from two 12-week, replicate, 
placebo-controlled trials and safety data were pooled from the 12-week and a 
52-week tiotropium-controlled trial. Patients received revefenacin 175 µg or 
placebo in the 12-week or tiotropium 18 µg in the 52-week studies. The efficacy 
endpoint was least squares (LS) mean change from baseline in trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). Clinical health outcomes were assessed 
using the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ).
RESULTS: Revefenacin produced similar improvements from baseline in trough FEV1 
in the non-LABA and LABA subgroups [placebo-adjusted LS mean change (95% 
confidence interval) in day 85 trough FEV1, 150.9 (110.3-191.6) ml and 139.2 
(82.9-195.5) ml; p < 0.0001 versus placebo]. Similar improvements were observed 
in SGRQ scores in the non-LABA and LABA subgroups [-3.3 (-5.4 to -1.2) and -3.4 
(-6.3 to -0.6)]. Improvements in lung function and health outcomes were observed 
regardless of airflow obstruction severity. Revefenacin was well tolerated with 
more adverse events reported in the LABA than the non-LABA subgroup.
CONCLUSIONS: Once daily revefenacin for nebulization can be an effective and 
well-tolerated treatment for patients who require concomitant use of LABA with 
or without ICS.
CLINICALTRIALS.GOV IDENTIFIERS: NCT02512510, NCT02459080, NCT02518139 The 
reviews of this paper are available via the supplemental material section.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466620905278
PMCID: PMC7052452
PMID: 32106777

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: SS is a 
consultant and advisory committee member for Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. and 
received research support from Mylan Inc. JFD is a consultant and advisory 
committee member for Mylan Inc. and Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc. GTF is a 
consultant for and received financial support from Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. 
CNB was an employee of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. at the time of this study. 
GDC is an employee of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc.


230. Intern Med J. 2019 Jan;49(1):66-73. doi: 10.1111/imj.13959.

Antimicrobial prescription in patients dying from chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Taverner J(1), Ross L(1), Bartlett C(1), Luthe M(2), Ong J(2), Irving L(1), 
Smallwood N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Clinical Costing Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Despite rising antimicrobial resistance, treatment guidelines for 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations are frequently 
ignored. Patients with terminal conditions are often prescribed antimicrobials 
despite the goal of care to reduce burdensome treatments. The appropriate use of 
antimicrobials in patients who die from an exacerbation of COPD is unknown.
AIM: To review antimicrobial prescription during the final admission in patients 
who died from an acute exacerbation of COPD.
METHODS: A retrospective medical record audit was performed for 475 patients who 
died over 12 years (2004-2015). Patients were analysed within three groups: 
Group 1 - pneumonia on chest radiograph, Group 2 - infective exacerbation of 
COPD +/- raised inflammatory markers (white cell count, C-reactive protein) and 
Group 3 - non-infective exacerbation of COPD.
RESULTS: A total of 221 patients died from COPD. The median age was 80 years, 
and 136 (60%) were male. Median respiratory function: forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s 0.8 L (41.0%), forced vital capacity 2.0 L (74.0%) and diffusing capacity 
for carbon monoxide 8 (40.5%). A total of 109 (49.3%) patients used home oxygen 
and 156 (70.6%) were ex-smokers. Of the cohort, 90.5% received antimicrobials. 
In Groups 1, 2 and 3, 68 (94.4%), 108 (92.3%) and 24 (75.0%) patients received 
antimicrobials respectively. Guideline-concordant therapy was administered to 
31.7% of patients (Group 1: 79.2%, Group 2: 4.3%, Group 3: 25.0%), 60.2% of 
patients received ceftriaxone and 44.8% received azithromycin. The median 
duration of therapy was 4 days and 27.1% received antimicrobials at the time of 
death.
CONCLUSION: Antimicrobials are overprescribed, and non-guideline antimicrobials 
are overused in patients who die from COPD. Further education of medical staff, 
regular medication reviews and the use of disease severity scores or clinical 
pathways may improve antimicrobial stewardship.

© 2018 Royal Australasian College of Physicians.

DOI: 10.1111/imj.13959
PMID: 29740931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Patient Rep Outcomes. 2019 Oct 29;3(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s41687-019-0155-9.

Responsiveness of PROMIS® to change in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Yount SE(1), Atwood C(2), Donohue J(3), Hays RD(4), Irwin D(5), Leidy NK(6), Liu 
H(7), Spritzer KL(4), DeWalt DA(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, 625 N. Michigan Avenue, 27th floor, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. 
s-yount@northwestern.edu.
(2)Pulmonary Section, VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System and University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, 
University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Evidera, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.
(8)Division of General Medicine and Clinical Epidemiology and the Cecil G. Sheps 
Center for Health Services Research, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine - Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive 
chronic disease characterized by airflow obstruction that leads to shortness of 
breath and substantial negative impacts on health-related quality of life 
(HRQL). The course of COPD includes periodic acute exacerbations that require 
changes in treatment and/or hospitalizations. This study was designed to examine 
the responsiveness of Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System® 
(PROMIS®) measures to changes associated with COPD exacerbation recovery.
METHODS: A longitudinal analysis using mixed-effects models was conducted of 
people who were enrolled while stable (n = 100) and those who experienced an 
acute exacerbation (n = 85). PROMIS (physical function, pain interference, pain 
behavior, fatigue, anxiety, depression, anger, social roles, discretionary 
social activities, Global Health, dyspnea severity and dyspnea functional 
limitations) and COPD-targeted HRQL measures were completed at baseline and at 
12 weeks.
RESULTS: We administered PROMIS measures using computer adaptive testing (CAT), 
followed by administration of any remaining short form (SF) items that had not 
yet been administered by CAT. Examination of the difference between group 
differences from baseline to 12 weeks in the stable and exacerbation groups 
revealed that the exacerbation group changed (improved) significantly more than 
the stable group in anxiety (p < .001 to p < .01; f2 effect size 
[ES] = 0.023/0.021), fatigue (p < .0001; ES = 0.036/0.047) and social roles 
(p < .001 to p < .05; ES = 0.035/0.024). All effect sizes were small in 
magnitude and smaller than hypothesized. Depression was also statistically 
significant (p < .05, SF only) but the ES was trivial. For all other PROMIS 
domains, the differences were not significant and ES were trivial.
CONCLUSIONS: This longitudinal study provides some support for the validity of 
the PROMIS fatigue, anxiety, and social roles domains in COPD, but further 
evaluation of responsiveness is warranted.

DOI: 10.1186/s41687-019-0155-9
PMCID: PMC6820639
PMID: 31664536

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


232. Lancet Respir Med. 2019 Sep;7(9):745-756. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(19)30190-0. 
Epub 2019 Jul 4.

Blood eosinophils and treatment response with triple and dual combination 
therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: analysis of the IMPACT trial.

Pascoe S(1), Barnes N(2), Brusselle G(3), Compton C(4), Criner GJ(5), Dransfield 
MT(6), Halpin DMG(7), Han MK(8), Hartley B(9), Lange P(10), Lettis S(11), Lipson 
DA(12), Lomas DA(13), Martinez FJ(14), Papi A(15), Roche N(16), van der Valk 
RJP(4), Wise R(17), Singh D(18).

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
pascoesteve@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, UK; Barts and the London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, London, UK.
(3)Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, UK.
(5)Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Lung Health 
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(7)University of Exeter Medical School, College of Medicine and Health, 
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.
(8)University of Michigan, Pulmonary & Critical Care, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(9)Statistics and Programming, Veramed Ltd, Twickenham, UK.
(10)Department of Public Health, Section of Epidemiology, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Medical Department, Herlev and Gentofte 
Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.
(11)GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, UK.
(12)GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA, USA; Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(13)UCL Respiratory, University College London, Gower Street, London, UK.
(14)New York-Presbyterian Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(15)Research Centre on Asthma and COPD, Department of Medical Sciences, 
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(16)Pneumologie, Cochin Hospital AP-HP, University Paris Descartes, Paris, 
France.
(17)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(18)University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2019 Sep;7(9):722-723.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have highlighted a relationship between reduction 
in rate of exacerbations with therapies containing inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) 
and baseline blood eosinophil count in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). The IMPACT trial showed that once-daily single-inhaler 
triple therapy significantly reduced exacerbations versus dual therapies. Blood 
eosinophil counts and smoking status could be important modifiers of treatment 
response to ICS. We aimed to model these relationships and their interactions, 
including outcomes other than exacerbations.
METHODS: IMPACT was a phase 3, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, 52-week 
global study comparing once-daily single-inhaler triple therapy (fluticasone 
furoate-umeclidinium-vilanterol) with dual inhaled therapy (fluticasone 
furoate-vilanterol or umeclidinium-vilanterol). Eligible patients had 
moderate-to-very-severe COPD and at least one moderate or severe exacerbation in 
the previous year. We used fractional polynomials to model continuous blood 
eosinophil counts. We used negative binomial regression for numbers of moderate 
and severe exacerbations, severe exacerbations, and pneumonia. We modelled 
differences at week 52 in trough FEV1, St George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) total score, and Transition Dyspnoea Index using repeated measurements 
mixed effect models. IMPACT was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number 
NCT02164513.
FINDINGS: The magnitude of benefit of regimens containing ICS (fluticasone 
furoate-umeclidinium-vilanterol n=4151 and fluticasone furoate-vilanterol 
n=4134) in reducing rates of moderate and severe exacerbations increased in 
proportion with blood eosinophil count, compared with a non-ICS dual long-acting 
bronchodilator (umeclidinium-vilanterol n=2070). The moderate and severe 
exacerbation rate ratio for triple therapy versus umeclidinium-vilanterol was 
0·88 (95% CI 0·74 to 1·04) at blood eosinophil count less than 90 cells per μL 
and 0·56 (0·47 to 0·66) at counts of 310 cells per μL or more; the corresponding 
rate ratio for fluticasone furoate-vilanterol versus umeclidinium-vilanterol was 
1·09 (0·91 to 1·29) and 0·56 (0·47 to 0·66), respectively. Similar results were 
observed for FEV1, Transition Dyspnoea Index, and SGRQ total score; however, the 
relationship with FEV1 was less marked. At blood eosinophil counts less than 90 
cells per μL and at counts of 310 cells per μL or more, the triple therapy 
versus umeclidinium-vilanterol treatment difference was 40 mL (95% CI 10 to 70) 
and 60 mL (20 to 100) for trough FEV1, -0·01 (-0·68 to 0·66) and 0·30 (-0·37 to 
0·97) for Transition Dyspnoea Index score, and -0·01 (-1·81 to 1·78) and -2·78 
(-4·64 to -0·92) for SGRQ total score, respectively. Smoking status modified the 
relationship between observed efficacy and blood eosinophil count for moderate 
or severe exacerbations, Transition Dyspnoea Index, and FEV1, with former 
smokers being more corticosteroid responsive at any eosinophil count than 
current smokers.
INTERPRETATION: This analysis of the IMPACT trial shows that assessment of blood 
eosinophil count and smoking status has the potential to optimise ICS use in 
clinical practice in patients with COPD and a history of exacerbations.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(19)30190-0
PMID: 31281061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Adv Ther. 2019 Dec;36(12):3291-3298. doi: 10.1007/s12325-019-01119-w. Epub 2019 
Oct 25.

Optimizing the Development Strategy of Combination Therapy in Respiratory 
Medicine: From Isolated Airways to Patients.

Calzetta L(1), Matera MG(2), Cazzola M(3), Rogliani P(3).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. luigino.calzetta@uniroma2.it.
(2)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(3)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.

Comment on
    Adv Ther. 2019 Apr;36(4):962-968.

The current recommendations for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) are pushing towards triple combination therapy based on the 
combination of an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) associated with two 
bronchodilator agents. However, dual bronchodilation remains the cornerstone for 
the treatment of most COPD patients. Combining a long-acting β2 adrenoceptor 
agonist (LABA) with a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) induces 
appreciable synergistic bronchorelaxant effect in human airways, especially when 
the medications are combined at isoeffective concentrations. Thus, each 
LABA/LAMA combination is characterized by a specific range of 
concentration-ratio at which the drug mixture may induce sustained synergistic 
interaction. Results of a recent randomized controlled trial (RCT, NCT00696020) 
and evidences from pre-clinical studies in human isolated airways poses the 
question whether combining tiotropium 5 μg with olodaterol 5 μg is the best 
combination option: tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg has the same efficacy profile 
of tiotropium/olodaterol 5/2 μg, and it is less effective than 
tiotropium/olodaterol 5/10 μg. Furthermore, tiotropium/olodaterol 5/2 μg, 
5/5 μg, and 5/10 μg combinations are generally characterized by the same safety 
profile. Indeed tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg is effective and safe in COPD, but 
a different development strategy based on solid data obtained from human 
isolated airways would have driven towards a better-balanced FDC to be tested in 
Phase III RCTs. Accurate bench-to-bedside plans are needed also in the 
development of triple combination therapies for asthma and COPD, in which the 
presence of an ICS in the formulation may further modulate the beneficial 
interaction between the LABA and the LAMA.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-019-01119-w
PMCID: PMC6860506
PMID: 31654332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 May 23;14:1063-1073. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S200919. eCollection 2019.

Inhaled corticosteroids, blood eosinophils, and FEV(1) decline in patients with 
COPD in a large UK primary health care setting.

Whittaker HR(1), Müllerova H(2), Jarvis D(1), Barnes NC(2), Jones PW(2), Compton 
CH(2), Kiddle SJ(3), Quint JK(1).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)Respiratory Epidemiology, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Uxbridge, UK.
(3)MRC Biostatistics Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Background: Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)-containing medications slow rate of 
decline of FEV1. Blood eosinophil (EOS) levels are associated with the degree of 
exacerbation reduction with ICS. Purpose: We investigated whether FEV1 decline 
differs between patients with and without ICS, stratified by blood EOS level. 
Patients and methods: The UK Clinical Practice Research Datalink (primary care 
records) and Hospital Episode Statistics (hospital records) were used to 
identify COPD patients aged 35 years or older, who were current or ex-smokers 
with ≥2 FEV1 measurements ≥6 months apart. Prevalent ICS use and the nearest EOS 
count to start of follow-up were identified. Patients were classified at 
baseline as higher stratum EOS (≥150 cell/µL) on ICS; higher stratum EOS not on 
ICS; lower stratum EOS (<150 cells/µL) on ICS; and lower stratum EOS not on ICS. 
In addition, an incident ICS cohort was used to investigate the rate of FEV1 
change by EOS and incident ICS use. Mixed-effects linear regression was used to 
compare rates of FEV1 change in mL/year. Results: A total of 26,675 COPD 
patients met our inclusion criteria (median age 69, 46% female). The median 
duration of follow up was 4.2 years. The rate of FEV1 change in prevalent ICS 
users was slower than non-ICS users (-12.6 mL/year vs -21.1 mL/year; P =0.001). 
The rate of FEV1 change was not significantly different when stratified by EOS 
level. The rate of FEV1 change in incident ICS users increased (+4.2 mL/year) vs 
-21.2 mL/year loss in non-ICS users; P<0.001. In patients with high EOS, 
incident ICS patients showed an increase in FEV1 (+12 mL/year) compared to 
non-ICS users whose FEV1 decreased (-20.8 mL/year); P<0.001. No statistical 
difference was seen in low EOS patients. Incident ICS use is associated with an 
improvement in FEV1 change, however, over time this association is lost. 
Conclusion: Regardless of blood EOS level, prevalent ICS use is associated with 
slower rates of FEV1 decline in COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S200919
PMCID: PMC6536812
PMID: 31213788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Miss Whittaker reports grants from 
GlaxoSmithKline, during the conduct of the study; Dr Müllerova was employed by 
and reported personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, during the conduct of the 
study; Dr Jarvis reports grants from European Union and Cystic Fibrosis Trust, 
outside the submitted work; she also reports grants from GlaxoSmithKline, during 
the conduct of the study. Dr Barnes is employed, holds shares and reports 
personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, outside the submitted work; he also received 
grants from GlaxoSmithKline, during the conduct of the study. Dr Jones is 
employed by and reports personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, during the conduct 
of the study; Dr Compton is employed, holds shares and reports personal fees 
from GlaxoSmithKline, during the conduct of the study; Dr Kiddle reports grants 
from MRC, during the conduct of the study; grants from Roche Diagnostics, 
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, Biotechnology and Biological 
Sciences Research Council, National Institute for Health Research, Alzheimer’s 
Society, Eli Lily, and Jannsen, outside the submitted work; Dr Kiddle was 
supported by a MRC Career Development Award (MR/PO21573/1). Dr Quint reports 
grants from GlaxoSmithKline, during the conduct of the study; grants from The 
Health Foundation, MRC, Wellcome Trust, British Lung Foundation, Insmed, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Teva, and GlaxoSmithKline, 
outside the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


235. Metabolomics. 2019 Jun 4;15(6):87. doi: 10.1007/s11306-019-1552-z.

Metabolomic signatures of asthma-COPD overlap (ACO) are different from asthma 
and COPD.

Ghosh N(1), Choudhury P(1), Subramani E(1), Saha D(2), Sengupta S(2), Joshi 
M(3), Banerjee R(4), Roychowdhury S(5), Bhattacharyya P(2), Chaudhury K(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Science and Technology (SMST), Indian Institute of 
Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, 721302, India.
(2)Institute of Pulmocare and Research, Kolkata, India.
(3)National Facility for High-field NMR, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 
Mumbai, India.
(4)Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India.
(5)Apollo Gleneagles Hospitals, Kolkata, India.
(6)School of Medical Science and Technology (SMST), Indian Institute of 
Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, 721302, India. koel@smst.iitkgp.ac.in.

INTRODUCTION: Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap, 
termed as ACO, is a complex heterogeneous disease without any clear diagnostic 
or therapeutic guidelines. The pathophysiology of the disease, its 
characteristic features, and existence as a unique disease entity remains 
unclear. Individuals with ACO have a faster lung function decline, more frequent 
exacerbations, and worse quality of life than those with COPD or asthma alone.
OBJECTIVES: The present study aims to determine whether ACO has a distinct 
metabolic profile in comparison to asthma and COPD.
METHODS: Two different groups of patients were recruited as discovery (D) and 
validation (V) cohorts. Serum samples obtained from moderate and severe asthma 
patients diagnosed as per GINA guidelines [n = 34(D); n = 32(V)], moderate and 
severe COPD cases identified by GOLD guidelines [n = 30(D); 32(V)], ACO patients 
diagnosed by joint GOLD and GINA guidelines [n = 35(D); 40(V)] and healthy 
controls [n = 33(D)] were characterized using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
spectrometry.
RESULTS: Multivariate and univariate analysis indicated that 12 metabolites 
[lipid, isoleucine, N-acetylglycoproteins (NAG), valine, glutamate, citric acid, 
glucose, L-leucine, lysine, asparagine, phenylalanine and histidine] were 
dysregulated in ACO patients when compared with both asthma and COPD. These 
metabolites were further validated in a fresh cohort of patients, which again 
exhibited a similar expression pattern.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that ACO has an enhanced energy and metabolic 
burden associated with it as compared to asthma and COPD. It is anticipated that 
our results will stimulate researchers to further explore ACO and unravel the 
pathophysiological complexities associated with the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s11306-019-1552-z
PMID: 31165288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. COPD. 2019 Apr;16(2):152-159. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1608172. Epub 2019 May 
23.

Blood Eosinophil Counts, Withdrawal of Inhaled Corticosteroids and Risk of COPD 
Exacerbations and Mortality in the Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD).

Oshagbemi OA(1)(2)(3)(4), Franssen FME(4)(5), van Kraaij S(1), Braeken 
DCW(3)(4)(5), Wouters EFM(4)(6), Maitland-van der Zee AH(3)(6), Driessen 
JHM(1)(3)(7), de Vries F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Toxicology, Maastricht University 
Medical Centre , Maastricht , the Netherlands.
(2)b Department of Epidemiology, Care and Public Health Research Institute 
(CAPHRI), Maastricht University , Maastricht , the Netherlands.
(3)c Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht 
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Utrecht , the Netherlands.
(4)d CIRO , Horn , the Netherlands.
(5)e Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre 
(MUMC+) , Maastricht , the Netherlands.
(6)f Department of Respiratory Medicine, Academic Medical Centre (AMC), 
University of Amsterdam (UvA) Amsterdam , the Netherlands.
(7)g NUTRIM School for Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, 
Maastricht University , Maastricht , the Netherlands.

Although recently introduced in the pharmacological treatment algorithm of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), there is a need for more data 
supporting the use of blood eosinophil counts as a biomarker to guide inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) therapy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the risk of 
moderate and/or severe exacerbations and all-cause mortality in a large primary 
care population after withdrawal of ICS compared to continued users stratified 
by elevated blood eosinophil counts. In this population based cohort study, we 
used data from the Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD) in the United 
Kingdom. We included subjects' aged 40 years or more who had a diagnosis of 
COPD. We excluded subjects with a history of asthma, pulmonary fibrosis, cardiac 
arrhythmia and bronchiectasis, COPD exacerbations occurring within 6 weeks prior 
to index date, or with a myocardial infarction within 3 months prior to index 
date. Continuous users were subjects who received their most recent ICS 
prescription within 3 months before the start of an interval. ICS withdrawals 
were those who discontinued ICS for more than 3 months. We evaluated the risk of 
moderate and/or severe exacerbations and all-cause mortality among subjects with 
various blood eosinophil thresholds who withdrew from ICS compared to continuous 
ICS users with elevated blood eosinophil levels using Cox regression analysis 
adjusted for potential confounders. We identified 48,157 subjects diagnosed with 
COPD between 1 January 2005 to 31 January 2014. Withdrawal of ICS was not 
associated with an increased risk of moderate-to-severe exacerbations among 
subjects with absolute blood eosinophil counts ≥0.34 × 109 cells/L [adjusted 
hazard ratio (adj. HR) 0.72; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.63-0.81] or relative 
counts ≥ 4.0% (adj. HR 0.72; 95% CI: 0.66-0.78). Similarly, withdrawal of ICS 
was not associated with an increased risk of severe exacerbations among subjects 
with absolute blood eosinophil ≥0.34 × 109 cells/L (adj. HR 0.82; 95% CI: 
0.61-1.10) or relative blood eosinophil counts ≥4.0% (adj. HR 0.80; 95% CI: 
0.61-1.04). No increased risk of all-cause mortality was observed among subjects 
who withdrew from ICS irrespective of elevated absolute or relative blood 
eosinophil counts. In a real-world primary care population, we did not observe 
an increased risk of moderate and/or severe COPD exacerbations or all-cause 
mortality among subjects with eosinophilia who withdrew their use of ICS.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1608172
PMID: 31117850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. BMC Pulm Med. 2019 May 16;19(1):95. doi: 10.1186/s12890-019-0851-5.

Prevalence and management of chronic breathlessness in COPD in a tertiary care 
center.

Carette H(1), Zysman M(2)(3), Morelot-Panzini C(4), Perrin J(1), Gomez E(1), 
Guillaumot A(1), Burgel PR(5), Deslee G(6), Surpas P(7), Le Rouzic O(8), Perez 
T(8), Chaouat A(1), Roche N(5), Chabot F(1); Initiatives BPCO 
(bronchopneumopathie chronique obstructive) Scientific Committee and 
Investigators.

Collaborators: Zysman M, Burgel PR, Deslee G, Surpas P, Le Rouzic O, Perez T, 
Roche N, Brinchault-Rabin G, Caillaud D, Chanez P, Court-Fortune I, Escamilla R, 
Jebrak G, Nesme-Meyer P, Pinet C, Risse B.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Department, Nancy, France.
(2)Pulmonary Department, Nancy, France. maeva55@club-internet.fr.
(3)InsermU955, team 04, 8 rue du general Sarrail, 94000, Créteil, France. 
maeva55@club-internet.fr.
(4)GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Respiratory and Intensive Care Medicine Department, 
Paris, France.
(5)Respiratory and Intensive Care Medicine Department, Cochin Hospital, AP-HP 
and Paris Descartes University (EA 2511), Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(6)Pulmonary Department, Maison Blanche University Hospital, INSERM U01250, 
Reims, France.
(7)Centre médical de Bayère, 30, route du Vieux-Château, 69380, Charnay, France.
(8)University Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1019 - 
UMR 8204 - CIIL - Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, F-59000, Lille, 
France.

BACKGROUND: Breathlessness is the prominent symptom of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Despite optimal therapeutic management including 
pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions, many COPD patients 
exhibit significant breathlessness. Chronic breathlessness is defined as 
breathlessness that persists despite optimal treatment of the underlying 
disease. Because of the major disability related to chronic breathlessness, 
symptomatic treatments including opioids have been recommended by several 
authors. The prevalence of chronic breathlessness in COPD and its management in 
routine clinical practice have been poorly investigated. Our aim was to examine 
prevalence, associated characteristics and management of chronic breathlessness 
in patients with COPD recruited in a real-life tertiary hospital-based cohort.
METHODS: A prospective study was conducted among 120 consecutive COPD patients 
recruited, in stable condition, at Nancy University Hospital, France. In 
parallel, 88 pulmonologists of the same geographical region were asked to 
respond to an on-line questionnaire on breathlessness management.
RESULTS: Sixty four (53%) patients had severe breathlessness (modified Medical 
Research Council scale≥3), despite optimal inhaled medications for 94% of them; 
40% had undergone pulmonary rehabilitation within the past 2 years. The severity 
of breathlessness increased with increasing airflow limitation. Breathlessness 
was associated with increased symptoms of anxiety, depression and with 
osteoporosis. No relation was found with other symptoms, exacerbation rate, or 
cardiovascular comorbidities. Among the patients with chronic breathlessness and 
Hospitalized Anxiety and/or Depression score > 10, only 25% were treated with 
antidepressant or anxiolytic. Among the pulmonologists 46 (52%) answered to the 
questionnaire and expressed a high willingness to prescribe opioids forchronic 
breathlessness, which contrasted with the finding that none of these patients 
received such treatments against breathlessness.
CONCLUSION: Treatment approaches to breathlessness and associated psychological 
distress are insufficient in COPD. This study highlights underuse of pulmonary 
rehabilitation and symptomatic treatment for breathlessness.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-019-0851-5
PMCID: PMC6524222
PMID: 31096982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HC reports grants and personal fees from France 
Oxygène, personal fees from RIRL reseau d’insuffisance respiratoire de Lorraine, 
outside the submitted work. MZ reports grants and personal fees from 
BoehringerIngelheim, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Chiesi, 
personal fees from GSK outside the submitted work. CMP declares that she have no 
competing interests. JP declares that she have no competing interests. EG 
declares that she have no competing interests. AG declares that she have no 
competing interests. PRB reports personal fees from Aptalis, personal fees from 
Astra-Zeneca, grants and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees 
from Chiesi, personal fees from GSK, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees 
from Pfizer, personal fees from Vertex, personal fees from Zambon, outside the 
submitted work; GD reports personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Astra 
Zeneca, personal fees from BTG/PneumRx, personal fees from Chiesi, personal fees 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, outside the submitted work. PS reports grants and 
personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim outside the submitted work. OLR reports 
grants and personal fees personal fees and non-financial support from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Lilly and Novartis; non-financial 
support from GlaxoSmithKline, MundiPharma, Pfizer, Teva, Santelys Association, 
Vertex and Vitalaire, all outside the submitted work. TP reports personal fees 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from GSK, 
personal fees from Chiesi, personal fees from Pierre Fabre, outside the 
submitted work. AC reports grants and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Actelion, personal fees from GSK 
outside the submitted work. NR reports grants and personal fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, grants and personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Teva, 
personal fees from GSK, personal fees from AstraZeneca, personal fees from 
Chiesi, personal fees from Mundipharma, personal fees from Cipla, grants and 
personal fees from Pfizer, personal fees from Sanofi, personal fees from Sandoz, 
personal fees from 3 M, personal fees from Zambon, outside the submitted work. 
FC reports grants and personal fees from AGEVIE, grants from ARAIRLOR, grants 
from Air Liquide, grants from Breas, grants from Covidien, grants from Philips, 
grants from Resmed, grants from Respironics, grants from Weinman and personal 
fees from Astra-Zeneca, personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees 
from GSK, personal fees from Novartis, outside the submitted work.


238. Tanaffos. 2019 Jan;18(1):52-57.

Association of Bile Acid and Pepsin Micro-aspiration with Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease Exacerbation.

Hashemi-Bajgani SM(1), Abbasi F(2), Shafahi A(1), Yazdani R(1), Samareh Fekri 
M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Afzalipour Hospital, 
Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran.
(2)Imam-Khomeini Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Center, Institute of Basic and Clinical Physiology 
Sciences, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is one of the most 
common chronic diseases all around the world. One of suggested risk factors for 
COPD is Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD). The aim of this study was 
investigation of the association between micro-aspiration of bile acid and 
pepsin with exacerbation attacks in COPD patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The present study was a descriptive cross-sectional 
study. Fifty-two COPD patients were selected by simple sampling from patients 
referring to the Bessat Lung Clinic. Participants were divided into two groups 
of with and without COPD exacerbation history in the past year. The severity of 
the disease was determined based on the GOLD criteria (mild, moderate, severe 
and very severe). Then, all patients underwent bronchoscopy and the 
concentrations of bile acid and pepsin were compared in Broncho-Alveolar Lavage 
Fluid (BALF) of two groups.
RESULTS: The mean of bile acids in the group without COPD exacerbations was 
lower (27.38±3.26 μmol/Lit) than the group with COPD exacerbations (32.31±5.35 
μmol/Lit) and this difference was not significant (P=0.436). The mean of pepsin 
in the first group was higher (118.46 ±15.44 ng/ml) than the second group 
(107.88±10.7 ng/ml) and this difference was also not significant (P=0.577).
CONCLUSION: According to the results of this study, there is no association 
between disease severity and number of exacerbations with micro-aspiration of 
bile acid and pepsin in COPD patients.

PMCID: PMC6690328
PMID: 31423141

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors have no 
conflict of interest.


239. Tiotropium.

Delgado BJ(1), Bajaj T(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 
Jan–.
2019 Oct 7.

Author information:
(1)Ross University School of Medicine
(2)UCLA-Kern Medical

Tiotropium is a long-acting muscarinic antagonist medication that has shown to 
provide promising therapeutic benefits for patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). The "Understanding Potential Long-Term Impacts on 
Function with Tiotropium" study, also known as UPLIFT, established that 
tiotropium use in patients with COPD resulted in three significant findings. 
First participants of the experimental group receiving tiotropium had a 
reduced risk of COPD exacerbations, second, when compared to the placebo group, 
the experimental group had an overall improved lung function and quality of life 
through the course of the 4-year trial, and thirdly the tiotropium reduced 
respiratory and cardiac morbidity in COPD patients. 

Copyright © 2020, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 31082171


240. Chest. 2019 Sep;156(3):456-465. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.04.012. Epub 2019 Apr 
29.

Stability of the Blood Eosinophilic Phenotype in Stable and Exacerbated COPD.

Schumann DM(1), Tamm M(1), Kostikas K(1), Stolz D(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Pneumology and Pulmonary Cell Research, University Hospital Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Clinic of Pneumology and Pulmonary Cell Research, University Hospital Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address: daiana.stolz@usb.ch.

BACKGROUND: There is controversy regarding the use of blood eosinophil levels as 
a biomarker of exacerbation risk and responsiveness of patients to inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS).
METHODS: Patients in stable COPD with Gold Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease airflow obstruction grades II to IV were enrolled in an 
observational multicenter trial. Concordance was defined as blood eosinophil 
values persistently lower than or persistently higher than the absolute cutoff 
points of 150 cells/μL and 300 cells/μL, or the percentage cutoff points of 2%, 
3%, and 4%. Discordance was obtained when the blood eosinophil values varied 
between any two visits. ICS treatment data were recorded at one time point at 
the inclusion of the study.
RESULTS: A total of 210 patients with 2,059 visits were included in the study. 
Seventy percent of the patients were male, and 36% were current smokers; their 
average age was 67.7 ± 9.4 years, and 81% were receiving ICS at the start of the 
study. Assessing eosinophil levels over time (median, 7 days [4; 12]), 
irrespective of exacerbation or hospitalization, there was a discordance of 77%, 
60%, and 42% when using the 2%, 3% and 4% cutoffs, respectively. This outcome 
changed to 34.5%, 24%, and 17.2% discordance when only using two visits for the 
analysis. The discordance was similar when using absolute eosinophil values. 
Patients in a stable state had higher discordant values than patients with 
mild/moderate exacerbations. The same was seen in patients hospitalized for 
other illnesses compared with patients hospitalized for severe exacerbation of 
COPD. Discordancy was high regardless of whether patients were taking ICS at the 
beginning of the study period.
CONCLUSIONS: These study data suggest that blood eosinophil levels present 
significant variability throughout the course of COPD, and a single measurement 
may therefore not be a reliable predictor of ICS response.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.04.012
PMID: 31047957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. BMJ Open. 2019 Feb 20;9(2):e025048. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-025048.

Protocol for a systematic literature review and network meta-analysis of the 
clinical benefit of inhaled maintenance therapies in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Lewis A(1), Axson EL(1), Potts J(1), Tarnowska R(2), Vioix H(2), Quint JK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Epidemiology, National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd, Bracknell, UK.
(3)Department of Respiratory Epidemiology, Occupational Medicine and Public 
Health, Imperial College London, London, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations 
progress the course of disease and impair lung function. Inhaled maintenance 
therapy reduces exacerbations. It is not yet established which inhaled therapy 
combination is best to reduce exacerbations, lung function decline and symptom 
burden.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Cochrane Library will be searched 
for articles between January 2011 and May 2018 using a pre-specified search 
strategy. Conference proceedings will be searched. Systematic reviews (with or 
without meta-analysis), randomised controlled trials (RCTs), cohort studies and 
case controlled studies comparing six interventions comprising different 
combinations of long-acting bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids in 
unison or on their own. The primary outcome is the reduction in 
moderate-to-severe exacerbations. Secondary outcomes include: lung function, 
quality of life, mortality and other adverse events. Titles and abstracts will 
screened by the primary researcher. A second reviewer will repeat this on a 
proportion of records. The Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcomes and 
Study framework will be used for data extraction. A network meta-analyses of 
outcomes from RCTs and real-world evidence will be integrated if feasible. The 
95% credible interval will be used to assess the statistical significance of 
each summary effect. Ranking of interventions will be based on their surface 
under cumulative ranking area.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: COPD exacerbations are burdensome to patients. We aim 
to report results that provide clinicians with a more informed choice of which 
inhaled therapy combinations are best to reduce exacerbations, improve disease 
burden and reduce lung function and exercise capacity decline, compared with the 
potential harms, in certain populations with COPD.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42018088013.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-025048
PMCID: PMC6398788
PMID: 30787090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AL was funded by Boehringer 
Ingelheim Ltd to perform this systematic review and network meta-analysis. ELA 
has nothing to declare. JP has nothing to declare. RT and HV are employees of 
Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd. JKQ’s research group has received funding from The 
Health Foundation, MRC, Wellcome Trust, BLF, GSK, Insmed, AZ and Bayer for other 
projects, none of which relate to this work. BI have funded this work. JKQ has 
received funds from AZ, GSK, Chiesi, Teva and BI for Advisory board 
participation or travel.


242. Drugs. 2019 Nov;79(16):1757-1775. doi: 10.1007/s40265-019-01198-7.

Benefit:Risk Profile of Budesonide in Obstructive Airways Disease.

Tashkin DP(1), Lipworth B(2), Brattsand R(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, 10833 Le 
Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1690, USA. dtashkin@mednet.ucla.edu.
(2)Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, Division of Molecular and Clinical 
Medicine, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK.
(3)Experimental Pharmacology, Budera Company, Kristinehamn, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Drugs. 2019 Nov;79(17):1911.

Airway inflammation is a major contributing factor in both asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and represents an important target for 
treatment. Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) as monotherapy or in combination 
therapy with long-acting β2-agonists or long-acting muscarinic antagonists are 
used extensively in the treatment of asthma and COPD. The development of ICS for 
their anti-inflammatory properties progressed through efforts to increase 
topical potency and minimise systemic potency and through advances in inhaled 
delivery technology. Budesonide is a potent, non-halogenated ICS that was 
developed in the early 1970s and is now one of the most widely used lung 
medicines worldwide. Inhaled budesonide's physiochemical and 
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic properties allow it to reach a rapid and high 
airway efficacy due to its more balanced relationship between water solubility 
and lipophilicity. When absorbed from the airways and lung tissue, its moderate 
lipophilicity shortens systemic exposure, and its unique property of 
intracellular esterification acts like a sustained release mechanism within 
airway tissues, contributing to its airway selectivity and a low risk of adverse 
events. There is a large volume of clinical evidence supporting the efficacy and 
safety of budesonide, both alone and in combination with the fast- and 
long-acting β2-agonist formoterol, as maintenance therapy in patients with 
asthma and with COPD. The combination of budesonide/formoterol can also be used 
as an as-needed reliever with anti-inflammatory properties, with or without 
regular maintenance for asthma, a novel approach that is already approved by 
some country-specific regulatory authorities and currently recommended in the 
Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) guidelines. Budesonide remains one of the 
most well-established and versatile of the inhaled anti-inflammatory drugs. This 
narrative review provides a clinical reappraisal of the benefit:risk profile of 
budesonide in the management of asthma and COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-019-01198-7
PMCID: PMC6825643
PMID: 31549299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Donald Tashkin has been the recipient of 
research grant support and fees for speaking and serving as a scientific 
advisory board member for AstraZeneca, an advisory board member and speaker for 
Teva, an advisory board member for Innoviva, the recipient of research grant 
support and an advisory board member for Novartis and a speaker and advisory 
board member for Sunovion. Brian Lipworth has received support from AstraZeneca 
for attending ATS 2018 as well as consultancy payments. He has also received 
payments for speaking, consulting, or advisory boards with Chiesi, Novartis, 
Sandoz, Sanofi, Teva, Lupin, Genentech, Boehringer Ingelheim, Dr. Reddy’s, 
Cipla, Vectura and Glenmark. Support for unrestricted grants or multicentre 
trials has been received from AstraZeneca, Teva, Janssen and Chiesi. Equipment 
and educational support provided by GlaxoSmithKline. Ralph Brattsand is a former 
employee of Astra and AstraZeneca but today is without economic support from 
them. He was one of the key inventors of budesonide, and holds stocks with 
AstraZeneca.


243. Respir Res. 2019 Feb 11;20(1):30. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-0997-y.

Effect of COPD severity and comorbidities on the result of the PHQ-9 tool for 
the diagnosis of depression: results from the COSYCONET cohort study.

von Siemens SM(1), Jörres RA(1), Behr J(2), Alter P(3), Lutter J(4), Lucke T(1), 
Söhler S(5), Welte T(6), Watz H(7), Vogelmeier CF(3), Trudzinski F(8), Rief 
W(9), Herbig B(1), Kahnert K(10); COSYCONET study group.

Author information:
(1)Institute and Outpatient Clinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental 
Medicine, Comprehensive Pneumology Center Munich (CPC-M), 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Ziemssenstr. 1, 80336, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine V, University of Munich (LMU), Ziemssenstr. 
1, 80336, Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-University Marburg, Germany, Member 
of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Baldingerstrasse, 35043, Marburg, 
Germany.
(4)Institute of Health Economics and Health Care Management, Helmholtz Zentrum 
München GmbH - German Research Center for Environmental Health, Comprehensive 
Pneumology Center Munich (CPC-M), Member of the German Center for Lung Research, 
Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764, Munich, Germany.
(5)ASCONET Study Coordination Office, University of Marburg, Baldingerstraße, 
35043, Marburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Pneumology, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 
30625, Hannover, Germany.
(7)Pulmonary Research Institute at LungenClinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research 
Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Woehrendamm 80, 
22927, Grosshansdorf, Germany.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine V - Pulmonology, Allergology, Respiratory 
Intensive Care Medicine, Saarland University Hospital, Kirrberger Straße 1, 
66424, Homburg, Germany.
(9)Department of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Philipps-University 
Marburg, Germany, Gutenbergstraße 18, 35032, Marburg, Germany.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine V, University of Munich (LMU), Ziemssenstr. 
1, 80336, Munich, Germany. Kathrin.Kahnert@med.uni-muenchen.de.

The diagnosis of depression, a frequent comorbidity of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), is often supported by questionnaires, such as the 
Patient Health Questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9). It is unknown to which extent its single 
questions are affected by the clinical characteristics of COPD patients.We 
addressed this question in 2255 GOLD grade 1-4 patients from the COSYCONET (COPD 
and Systemic Consequences - Comorbidities Network) COPD cohort. The dependence 
on COPD severity was assessed using symptoms, exacerbation risk (GOLD A-D; 
modified Medical Research Council dyspnoea scale (mMRC)), and frequent 
comorbidities as predictors of PHQ-9 results, while including age, gender, body 
mass index (BMI) and smoking habits as covariates.Symptoms and exacerbation risk 
were associated with depression in an additive manner, with mean elevations in 
the PHQ-9 sum score by 2.75 and 1.44 points, respectively. Asthma, sleep apnoea, 
gastrointestinal disorders, osteoporosis and arthritis were linked to increases 
by 0.8 to 1.3 points. Overall, the COPD characteristics contributed to the mean 
PHQ-9 score by increases from 4.5 or 5.2 to 6.3 points, respectively, when 
either taking GOLD A as reference or the absence of comorbidities. This finding 
was independent of the diagnosis of mental disorder or the intake of 
antidepressants. The presence of COPD led to an increase in the proportion of 
scores indicating depression from 12 to 22%. Single item analysis revealed 
homogenous effects regarding GOLD groups, but heterogeneous effects regarding 
GOLD grades.These findings indicate specific effects of COPD severity on the 
PHQ-9 depression score, especially symptoms and exacerbation risk, explaining 
the high prevalence of depression in COPD. Alternative explanations like an 
overlap of COPD severity and PHQ-9 items are discussed. Of note, we also found 
COPD treatment effects on depression scores.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-0997-y
PMCID: PMC6371561
PMID: 30744630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
assessments were approved by the central (Marburg (Ethikkommission FB Medizin 
Marburg) and local (Bad Reichenhall (Ethikkommission bayerische 
Landesärztekammer); Berlin (Ethikkommission Ärztekammer Berlin); Bochum 
(Ethikkommission Medizinische Fakultät der RUB); Borstel (Ethikkommission 
Universität Lübeck); Coswig (Ethikkommission TU Dresden); Donaustauf 
(Ethikkommission Universitätsklinikum Regensburg); Essen (Ethikkommission 
Medizinische Fakultät Duisburg-Essen); Gießen (Ethikkommission Fachbereich 
Medizin); Greifswald (Ethikkommission Universitätsmedizin Greifswald); 
Großhansdorf (Ethikkommission Ärztekammer Schleswig-Holstein); Hamburg 
(Ethikkommission Ärztekammer Hamburg); MHH Hannover / Coppenbrügge (MHH 
Ethikkommission); Heidelberg Thorax/Uniklinik (Ethikkommission Universität 
Heidelberg); Homburg (Ethikkommission Saarbrücken); Immenhausen (Ethikkommission 
Landesärztekammer Hessen); Kiel (Ethikkommission Christian-Albrechts-Universität 
zu Kiel); Leipzig (Ethikkommission Universität Leipzig); Löwenstein 
(Ethikkommission Landesärztekammer Baden-Württemberg); Mainz (Ethikkommission 
Landesärztekammer Rheinland-Pfalz); München LMU/Gauting (Ethikkommission 
Klinikum Universität München); Nürnberg (Ethikkommission 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen Nürnberg); Rostock (Ethikkommission 
Universität Rostock); Berchtesgadener Land (Ethikkommission Land Salzburg); 
Schmallenberg (Ethikkommission Ärztekammer Westfalen-Lippe); Solingen 
(Ethikkommission Universität Witten-Herdecke); Ulm (Ethikkommission Universität 
Ulm); Würzburg (Ethikkommission Universität Würzburg)) ethical committees and 
written informed consent was obtained from all patients. The study was conducted 
from September 2011 to December 2013 and comprised 151 patients recruited within 
the COSYCONET framework (ClinicalTrials.gov, Identifier: NCT01245933). For 
further information see: Karch A, Vogelmeier C, Welte T, Bals R, Kauczor HU, 
Biederer J, Heinrich J, Schulz H, Glaser S, Holle R et al.: The German COPD 
cohort COSYCONET: Aims, methods and descriptive analysis of the study population 
at baseline. Respir Med 2016, 114:27–37. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Within the 
ethical approval the participants of the study gave their consent to publish the 
data collected during the study period. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare 
that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


244. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Aug;57:101802. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101802. Epub 
2019 May 13.

Efficacy and safety of the dual bronchodilator combination 
umeclidinium/vilanterol in COPD by age and airflow limitation severity: A pooled 
post hoc analysis of seven clinical trials.

Ray R(1), Tombs L(2), Naya I(3), Compton C(4), Lipson DA(5), Boucot I(6).

Author information:
(1)US Medical Affairs, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
27709-3398, USA. Electronic address: riju.x.ray@gsk.com.
(2)Precise Approach Ltd, Contingent Worker on Assignment at GSK, Stockley Park 
West, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK. Electronic address: lee.x.tombs@gsk.com.
(3)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, 
UK. Electronic address: ian.p.naya@gsk.com.
(4)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, 
UK. Electronic address: chris.h.compton@gsk.com.
(5)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, 1250 S Collegeville Rd, 
Collegeville, PA, PA, 19426, USA; Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, 3400 Civic Center Blvd, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. Electronic 
address: david.a.lipson@gsk.com.
(6)Global Respiratory Franchise, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, 
UK. Electronic address: isabelle.i.boucot@gsk.com.

BACKGROUND: Elderly patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
and those with more severe airway limitation are perceived to experience reduced 
efficacy from inhaled bronchodilators, especially those administered in a dry 
powder inhaler. This study compared the efficacy and safety of a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist/long-acting β2-agonist dry powder combination in elderly 
patients with COPD and patients with moderate-to-very severe airflow limitation.
METHODS: This post hoc pooled analysis of seven randomized studies of ≥12 weeks' 
duration investigated the efficacy and safety of umeclidinium/vilanterol 
(UMEC/VI) 62.5/25 μg versus tiotropium (TIO) 18 μg or fluticasone 
propionate/salmeterol (FP/SAL) 250/50 μg. Change from baseline in trough forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), a common efficacy measure in all trials, 
proportion of FEV1 responders (≥100 mL increase from baseline) and safety 
outcomes were analyzed at Day 28, 56, and 84 in patients classified by age (<65, 
≥65, and ≥75 years of age) and severity of baseline airflow limitation (Global 
initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD] stage 2 [moderate] and 
stage 3/4 [severe/very severe]). A 24-week analysis was also conducted for the 
UMEC/VI versus TIO comparison.
RESULTS: The pooled intent-to-treat population comprised 3821 patients (≥65 
years: 44-45%; ≥75 years: 9-10%; GOLD stage 3/4: 50-55%); 2246, 874, and 701 
patients received UMEC/VI, TIO, or FP/SAL, respectively. Significant 
improvements in trough FEV1 at Day 84 were observed with UMEC/VI versus TIO or 
FP/SAL irrespective of age (all p ≤ 0.029) or GOLD stage (all p < 0.001). The 
proportion of FEV1 responders at Day 84 was significantly greater with UMEC/VI 
versus TIO or FP/SAL across all age groups (all p ≤ 0.016) and GOLD stages (all 
p < 0.001). Safety profiles were similar between treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI consistently demonstrated improved lung function versus TIO 
and FP/SAL across age and airflow limitation severity subgroups, with no safety 
concerns, indicating that UMEC/VI provides no loss in efficacy or additional 
safety concerns for both elderly patients with COPD and patients with 
severe/very severe airway limitation.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101802
PMID: 31096036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020 Feb;20(1):43-47. doi: 
10.1097/ACI.0000000000000596.

Asthma/obstructive pulmonary disease overlap: update on definition, biomarkers, 
and therapeutics.

Generoso A(1), Oppenheimer J.

Author information:
(1)Allergy & Immunology Department, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, The State 
University of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Asthma/chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap (ACO) 
continues to be a poorly understood condition. This review discusses newly 
proposed criteria and potential biomarkers in ACO, to aid in diagnosis and 
research studies, and prudent therapeutic approaches.
RECENT FINDINGS: A global expert panel proposed an operational definition 
consisting of major and minor criteria as a step toward defining ACO. Serum 
periostin and YKL-40 may serve as biomarkers for ACO. Clinically, a reasonable 
therapeutic approach to ACO is the early addition of a long-acting β-agonist 
(LABA) and/or a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) to an inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS).
SUMMARY: Both the proposed criteria and the described biomarkers for ACO can 
help guide clinicians in identifying this condition as well as aid researchers 
in designing much needed future studies. In the meantime, clinicians can treat 
potential ACO patients using the above approach, until therapeutic studies in 
clearly defined ACO patients are performed.

DOI: 10.1097/ACI.0000000000000596
PMID: 31688150


246. J Clin Lab Anal. 2019 Feb;33(2):e22678. doi: 10.1002/jcla.22678. Epub 2018 Sep 
19.

Long noncoding RNAs antisense noncoding RNA in the INK4 locus (ANRIL) correlates 
with lower acute exacerbation risk, decreased inflammatory cytokines, and mild 
GOLD stage in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ge J(1), Geng S(1), Jiang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to assess the predictive value of long noncoding RNAs 
antisense noncoding RNA in the INK4 locus (lncRNAs ANRIL) for acute exacerbation 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and evaluate its correlation 
with inflammatory cytokines as well as the Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) stage in COPD patients.
METHODS: A total of 136 acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD) patients, 138 
stable COPD patients, and 140 healthy controls (HCs) were consecutively 
recruited, and plasma samples were collected. Real-time polymerase chain 
reaction was used to detect lncRNA ANRIL expression. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay was performed to detect inflammatory cytokines expressions.
RESULTS: LncRNA ANRIL expression was lower in AECOPD patients compared with 
stable COPD patients and HCs (Both P < 0.001). Receiver operating characteristic 
curves revealed lncRNA ANRIL could distinguish AECOPD patients from HCs (area 
under curve (AUC):0.700, 95% CI: 0.638-0.762) and stable COPD patients (AUC: 
0.659, 95% CI: 0.594-0.724). For inflammatory cytokines, lncRNA ANRIL expression 
was negatively correlated with TNF-α (P < 0.001), IL-1β (P = 0.015), IL-8 (P = 
0.008), IL-17A (P = 0.002), and LTB-4 (P = 0.004) in AECOPD patients, while it 
was negatively correlated with TNF-α (P = 0.049), IL-1β (P = 0.005), IL-17A (P = 
0.030), and LTB-4 (P = 0.011) in stable COPD patients. Furthermore, lncRNA ANRIL 
expression negatively correlated with GOLD stage in AECOPD patients (P = 0.001), 
but not in stable COPD patients (P = 0.131).
CONCLUSION: LncRNA ANRIL associates with lower acute exacerbation risk, 
decreased inflammatory cytokines, and mild GOLD stage in COPD patients.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.22678
PMCID: PMC6818591
PMID: 30230590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jun 28;14:1389-1397. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S205517. eCollection 2019.

Prediction of first acute exacerbation using COPD subtypes identified by cluster 
analysis.

Yoon HY(1), Park SY(1), Lee CH(2), Byun MK(3), Na JO(4), Lee JS(5), Lee WY(6), 
Yoo KH(7), Jung KS(8), Lee JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, College of Medicine, Ewha Womans Seoul Hospital, Ewha Womans 
University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Gangnam 
Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Yonsei University 
Health System, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Soonchunhyang 
University, College of Medicine, Cheonan, Korea.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Centre, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Wonju Christian Hospital, Yonsei University 
Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju, Korea.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Konkuk University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(8)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Hallym University Medical Center, Hallym University College 
of Medicine, Anyang, Korea.

PURPOSE: In patients with COPD, acute exacerbation (AE) is not only an important 
determinant of prognosis, but also an important factor in choosing therapeutic 
agents. In this study, we evaluated the usefulness of COPD subtypes identified 
through cluster analysis to predict the first AE.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Among COPD patients in the Korea COPD Subgroup Study 
(KOCOSS) cohort, 1,195 who had follow-up data for AE were included in our study. 
We selected seven variables for cluster analysis - age, body mass index, smoking 
status, history of asthma, COPD assessment test (CAT) score, post-bronchodilator 
(BD) FEV1 % predicted, and diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide % predicted.
RESULTS: K-means clustering identified four clusters for COPD that we named 
putative asthma-COPD overlap (ACO), mild COPD, moderate COPD, and severe COPD 
subtypes. The ACO group (n=196) showed the second-best post-BD FEV1 (75.5% vs 
80.9% [mild COPD, n=313] vs 52.4% [moderate COPD, n=345] vs 46.7% [severe COPD, 
n=341] predicted), the longest 6-min walking distance (424 m vs 405 m vs 389  m 
vs 365 m), and the lowest CAT score (12.2 vs 13.7 vs 15.6 vs 17.5) among the 
four groups. ACO group had greater risk for first AE compared to the mild COPD 
group (HR, 1.683; 95% CI, 1.175-2.410). The moderate COPD and severe COPD group 
HR values were 1.587 (95% CI, 1.145-2.200) and 1.664 (95% CI, 1.203-2.302), 
respectively. In addition, St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire score (HR: 
1.019; 95% CI, 1.014-1.024) and gastroesophageal reflux disease were independent 
factors associated with the first AE (HR: 1.535; 95% CI, 1.116-2.112).
CONCLUSION: Our cluster analysis revealed an exacerbator subtype of COPD 
independent of FEV1. Since these patients are susceptible to AE, a more 
aggressive treatment strategy is needed in these patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S205517
PMCID: PMC6607981
PMID: 31388298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


248. Respir Res. 2019 May 8;20(1):86. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1059-1.

Association of platelet count with all-cause mortality and risk of 
cardiovascular and respiratory morbidity in stable COPD.

Fawzy A(1), Anderson JA(2), Cowans NJ(3), Crim C(4), Wise R(1), Yates JC(4), 
Hansel NN(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
1830 E. Monument St. 5th Floor, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Research & Development, GlaxoSmithKline plc, Stockley Park, Middlesex, UK.
(3)Statistics and Programming, Veramed Ltd, Twickenham, UK.
(4)Research & Development, GlaxoSmithKline plc, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
1830 E. Monument St. 5th Floor, Baltimore, MD, USA. nhansel1@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: Platelet count is a prognostic indicator in the general population 
and elderly. Thrombocytosis during acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) has been 
associated with mortality; however, the relationship between platelet count and 
mortality in stable COPD is unknown.
METHODS: We performed post hoc secondary analysis on a subsample of 1797 
patients in the Study to Understand Mortality and Morbidity in COPD (SUMMIT) who 
had blood samples drawn at baseline. Participants were current or former 
smokers, 40-80 years old with moderate COPD and history or increased risk of 
cardiovascular (CV) disease. The primary outcome was on and post-treatment 
all-cause mortality. Secondary outcomes included first-on-treatment 
moderate/severe AECOPD and on-treatment CV composite event (CV death, myocardial 
infarction, stroke, unstable angina and transient ischemic attack). 
Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models were used to investigate study 
endpoint associations with platelet count quintile grouping, continuous platelet 
count utilizing two-term fractional polynomials, and categories of low, normal 
and high platelet count (< 150, ≥150 to < 300, ≥300 × 109/L).
RESULTS: Patients were followed for 2.3 ± 0.9 years for vital status and 
1.6 ± 1.1 years for morbidity endpoints during which 105 (5.8%) died, 651 
(36.2%) experienced AECOPD (159 with severe AECOPD) and 86 (4.8%) experienced a 
CV event. A U-shaped association between platelet count and all-cause mortality 
was observed. Compared to the third quintile group (Q3) of platelet count, risk 
of death was increased in the lowest quintile group (Q1; hazard ratio [HR]: 
1.73; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.93-3.23) and highest quintile group (Q5; 
HR: 1.66; 95%CI: 0.89-3.10), though point estimates were imprecise. Using 
clinical cutoffs, compared with normal platelet counts (≥150 to < 300 × 109/L), 
risk of all-cause mortality was nominally increased among patients with 
thrombocytopenia (HR: 1.46; 95%CI: 0.81-2.64) and high platelet count (HR: 1.66; 
95%CI: 0.96-2.86). Compared with Q3, CV events were nominally increased for Q5 
(HR: 1.71; 95%CI: 0.83-3.49) and Q1 (HR: 1.41; 95%CI: 0.70, 2.85). There was no 
association between platelet count and AECOPD.
CONCLUSIONS: In stable COPD platelet count demonstrated a U-shaped association 
with increased risk of 3-year all-cause mortality, though a platelet count level 
above or below which risk of mortality was increased could not be definitively 
identified.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01313676 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1059-1
PMCID: PMC6507019
PMID: 31068182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study was approved by local ethics committees and was conducted in accordance 
with the Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical Practice guidelines. CONSENT 
FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: AF declares no conflict of 
interest. JAA, CC and JCY are employees of, and own shares in, GlaxoSmithKline 
plc. NJC is employed by Veramed Ltd., a Contract Research Organisation 
undertaking contracted statistical analyses of respiratory studies funded by 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. RW served as the Chair of the Summit Clinical Endpoint 
Committee and has received grant support and received consulting fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline plc during the conduct of the study. He has received grants and 
consulting fees from AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim. He has received 
consulting fees from Contrafect, Pulmonx, Roche, Spiration, Sunovion, Merck, 
Circassia, Verona, Mylan, Theravance, and Propeller Health unrelated to the 
submitted work. NNH has participated on advisory boards for GlaxoSmithKline plc, 
Mylan and AstraZeneca, and has received Research Grants from GlaxoSmithKline 
plc, AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.


249. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jul 5;14:1423-1439. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S201899. eCollection 2019.

Determinants of healthcare utilization and costs in COPD patients: first 
longitudinal results from the German COPD cohort COSYCONET.

Byng D(#)(1)(2), Lutter JI(#)(1), Wacker ME(1), Jörres RA(3), Liu X(4), Karrasch 
S(3)(5), Schulz H(5), Vogelmeier C(6), Holle R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Economics and Health Care Management, Helmholtz Zentrum 
München, GmbH - German Research Center for Environmental Health, Comprehensive 
Pneumology Center Munich (CPC-M), Member of the German Center for Lung Research 
, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology (IBE), 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU) , 81377 Munich, Germany.
(3)Institute and Outpatient Clinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental 
Medicine, University Hospital, LMU Munich , 80336 Munich, Germany.
(4)Institute for Biostatistics, Hannover Medical School , 30625 Hannover, 
Germany.
(5)Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München (GmbH) - German Research 
Center for Environmental Health, Comprehensive Pneumology Center Munich (CPC-M), 
Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL) , 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Marburg, University Giessen 
and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member of the German Center for Lung Research, 
35043 Marburg, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: In light of overall increasing healthcare expenditures, it is 
mandatory to study determinants of future costs in chronic diseases. This study 
reports the first longitudinal results on healthcare utilization and associated 
costs from the German chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) cohort 
COSYCONET.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Based on self-reported data of 1904 patients with COPD who 
attended the baseline and 18-month follow-up visits, direct costs were 
calculated for the 12 months preceding both examinations. Direct costs at 
follow-up were regressed on baseline disease severity and other co-variables to 
identify determinants of future costs. Change score models were developed to 
identify predictors of cost increases over 18 months. As possible predictors, 
models included GOLD grade, age, sex, education, smoking status, body mass 
index, comorbidity, years since COPD diagnosis, presence of symptoms, and 
exacerbation history.
RESULTS: Inflation-adjusted mean annual direct costs increased by 5% (n.s., 
€6,739 to €7,091) between the two visits. Annual future costs were significantly 
higher in baseline GOLD grades 2, 3, and 4 (factors 1.24, 95%-confidence 
interval [1.07-1.43], 1.27 [1.09-1.48], 1.57 [1.27-1.93]). A history of moderate 
or severe exacerbations within 12 months, a comorbidity count >3, and the 
presence of dyspnea and underweight were significant predictors of cost increase 
(estimates ranging between + €887 and + €3,679, all p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Higher GOLD grade, comorbidity burden, dyspnea and moderate or 
severe exacerbations were determinants of elevated future costs and cost 
increases in COPD. In addition we identified underweight as independent risk 
factor for an increase in direct healthcare costs over time.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S201899
PMCID: PMC6616193
PMID: 31308648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Johanna I Lutter reports grants from German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research during the conduct of the study. 
Stefan Karrasch reports grants from German Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research (BMBF) during the conduct of the study. Holger Schulz report grants 
from German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), during the 
conduct of the study. Claus Vogelmeier report grants and personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, grants and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees 
from CSL Behring, personal fees from Chiesi, grants and personal fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline, grants and personal fees from Grifols, personal fees from 
Menarini, personal fees from Mundipharma, grants and personal fees from 
Novartis, personal fees from Teva, personal fees from Cipla, grants from Bayer 
Schering Pharma AG, grants from MSD, and grants from Pfizer outside the 
submitted work. Rolf Holle report grants from German Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research, during the conduct of the study. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this work.


250. Value Health. 2019 Oct;22(10):1092-1101. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2019.05.006. Epub 
2019 Aug 17.

Economic Impact of Reducing Inappropriate Inhaled Corticosteroids Use in 
Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: ISPOR's Guidance on Budget 
Impact in Practice.

Fens T(1), van der Pol S(2), Kocks JWH(3), Postma MJ(4), van Boven JFM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Groningen Research Institute of 
Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
s.van.der.pol@rug.nl.
(3)General Practitioners Research Institute, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Health Sciences, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Groningen Research Institute of 
Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Department of 
Economics, Econometrics & Finance, University of Groningen, Faculty of Economics 
& Business, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of General Practice & Elderly Care Medicine, Groningen Research 
Institute for Asthma and COPD (GRIAC), University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the budget impact of restricting inappropriate inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) use according to the Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD)-guidelines indication for ICS use in the chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)-population, taking The Netherlands as a 
reference case.
METHODS: A budget impact model was developed and closely aligned with the 
International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research best-practice 
guidelines. The model estimates the impact of pharmacologic COPD maintenance 
treatments on clinical events (exacerbations and pneumonias) and associated 
healthcare utilization and costs. The current treatment mix included all 
maintenance treatments including long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA), 
long-acting β2-agonists (LABA), LABA/ICS, LABA/LAMA, and triple therapy 
(LABA/LAMA/ICS). We modeled a situation where 25% of patients would use 
ICS-containing treatments and compared this to the current Dutch situation with 
60% ICS use. A 5-year time horizon with a Dutch healthcare payer's perspective 
was used. In sensitivity analyses, a range of values for absolute ICS reduction 
(20%-40%), relative risks of exacerbations and pneumonia events, and other input 
parameters were explored.
RESULTS: Over a period of 5 years, the new treatment mix with Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease guideline recommended ICS, and LABA/LAMA 
use resulted in potential avoidance of 17 405 exacerbations and 11 984 
pneumonias and accompanied savings of €84 million in the base-case scenario. 
Savings were consistent in various sensitivity analyses, indicating cost savings 
between €30 and €200 million.
CONCLUSION: Reducing inappropriate ICS use and increasing use of LABA/LAMA in 
COPD patients could result in a reduction of exacerbations and pneumonias, 
corresponding with a reduction in total costs for COPD in The Netherlands.

Copyright © 2019 ISPOR–The Professional Society for Health Economics and 
Outcomes Research. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jval.2019.05.006
PMID: 31563251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Infect Dis (Lond). 2019 Sep;51(9):639-650. doi: 10.1080/23744235.2019.1644456. 
Epub 2019 Jul 29.

Potential of serum procalcitonin in predicting bacterial exacerbation and 
guiding antibiotic administration in severe COPD exacerbations: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Ni W(1), Bao J(1), Yang D(1), Xi W(1), Wang K(1), Xu Y(1), Zhang R(1), Gao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Peking University 
People's Hospital , Beijing , China.

Background: The value of procalcitonin (PCT) in the diagnosis of bacterial 
infections and for determining antibiotic usage among patients with acute 
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) is currently 
unclear. Methods: We systematically reviewed the literature and selected studies 
that evaluated PCT as a biomarker for predicting bacterial infection and 
compared PCT-based protocols to determine its application in the initiation or 
discontinuation of antibiotics. Guidance for systematic reviews from Cochrane 
and the GRADE were followed to perform this study. Data were pooled and analyzed 
by using a random-effects or a fixed-effects model based on the heterogeneity. 
Results: The pooled sensitivity and specificity of PCT in diagnosing respiratory 
bacterial infections were 0.60 and 0.76, respectively, with the area under the 
summary receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.77. Subgroup analysis 
showed that the sensitivity and specificity of PCT for patients in ICU were 0.48 
and 0.69, respectively. PCT-based protocols decreased antibiotic prescription 
(relative risk = 0.66, 95% CI: 0.62-0.71) and total antibiotic exposure (mean 
difference = -2.60, 95% CI: -4.48-0.72), without affecting clinical outcomes 
such as treatment failure, length of hospitalization and rates of 
re-exacerbation or overall mortality. Conclusions: PCT has a moderate ability to 
distinguish bacterial respiratory infection in patients with AECOPD. PCT-guided 
algorithm can reduce unnecessary administration of antibiotics without 
increasing adverse outcomes. However, for patients requiring admission in the 
ICU, PCT may have a poor diagnostic value, and the PCT-guided algorithm may not 
effectively and safely reduce the antibiotic exposure.

DOI: 10.1080/23744235.2019.1644456
PMID: 31355690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Rev Med Suisse. 2020 Jan 15;16(676-7):81-86.

[Pulmonary medicine: asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Castro AFTE(1), Chucri S(1), Adler D(1), Janssens JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de pneumologie, Département de médecine, HUG, 1211 Genève 14.

Important changes have been proposed by expert groups for the management of mild 
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): for safety reasons, 
short-acting beta-2 agonists (SABA) are no longer recommended as « reliever 
therapy » in mild asthma, and should be replaced by symptom-driven inhaled 
corticosteroids, alone or combined with a beta-2 agonist ; for COPD patients 
recommendations as to use of inhaled corticosteroids have been redefined. New 
therapeutic options for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis are being evaluated: 
recombinant human pentraxin 2 may become a new therapeutic option among the 
existing specific treatments (pirfenidone, nintedanib). These novelties are 
discussed in this review of the recent medical literature.

Publisher: D’importantes modifications ont été proposées par les sociétés 
savantes dans la prise en charge des sujets asthmatiques légers et des sujets 
souffrant de bronchopneumopathie chronique obstructive (BPCO) : abandon des 
bêta-2 agonistes à action courte (BAAC) en traitement de secours pour l’asthme 
pour des raisons de sécurité, en privilégiant le rôle des corticostéroïdes 
inhalés seuls ou associés à un bêta-2 mimétique chez des sujets symptomatiques, 
et redéfinition de la place des corticostéroïdes inhalés lors de BPCO. Dans la 
fibrose pulmonaire idiopathique, la pentraxine-2 humaine recombinante se profile 
comme une nouvelle option thérapeutique possible, venant compléter la gamme des 
traitements spécifiques (pirfénidone, nintédanib). Ces nouveautés sont discutées 
dans cette revue de la littérature récente.

PMID: 31961091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit 
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.


253. Curr Drug Targets. 2019;20(16):1670-1679. doi: 
10.2174/1389450120666190808141625.

Absolute Blood Eosinophil Counts to Guide Inhaled Corticosteroids Therapy Among 
Patients with COPD: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Oshagbemi OA(1), Odiba JO(2), Daniel A(3), Yunusa I(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Care and Public Health Research Institute 
(CAPHRI), Maastricht University, Netherlands.
(2)Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Division of Pharmacy, University of Tasmania, Australia.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, 
Boston, MA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
2019 recommends the use of absolute blood eosinophil count as a guide for the 
escalation and de-escalation of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in the 
pharmacological management of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). We evaluated the risk of moderate or severe exacerbations among 
patients escalating and de-escalating ICS therapy by absolute blood eosinophil 
thresholds in this systematic review.
METHODS: Through a comprehensive literature search of Pubmed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, 
and clinical trial sites up to April 2019, we identified relevant studies. We 
used generic inverse variance method with fixed-effects estimates to compare the 
risk of moderate or severe exacerbations among COPD patients with elevated blood 
eosinophil counts exposed to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) versus non-ICS 
treatments groups expressed as risk ratios.
RESULTS: Ten studies (8 randomised control trials and 2 observational studies) 
were included, with a total of 85,059 COPD patients. In our pooled analysis, we 
found an overall reduction in risk of moderate or severe exacerbations in 
patients with absolute blood eosinophil thresholds ranging from ≥ 100 to ≥ 340 
cells/µL among patients escalating ICS (RR, 0.77, 95% CI, 0.73-0.81). For 
studies evaluating the effects of de-escalation of ICS on moderate to severe 
exacerbations using blood eosinophil thresholds of ≥ 300 to ≥ 340 cells/µL had 
an increased risk of moderate or severe exacerbations following the 
de-escalation of ICS (RR, 1.66, 95% CI, 1.31-2.10).
CONCLUSION: This study confirms the validity of the recommended absolute blood 
eosinophil count thresholds for the escalation and de-escalation of ICS among 
COPD patients. However, this recommendation is for COPD patients with prior 
exacerbations rather than among newly diagnosed COPD patients as observed in 
this study. COPD patients with current or past history of asthma represent a 
unique phenotypic group which should be further evaluated.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389450120666190808141625
PMID: 31393244


254. Rev Mal Respir. 2019 Apr;36(4):468-476. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2019.02.006. Epub 
2019 Apr 20.

[The GLORI-COPD score: detection of COPD patients at risk of complications].

[Article in French]

Eap D(1), Ghasarossian C(1), Malmartel A(2).

Author information:
(1)Département de médecine générale, université de médecine Paris 
Descartes - Site Cochin, 24, rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.
(2)Département de médecine générale, université de médecine Paris 
Descartes - Site Cochin, 24, rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France. 
Electronic address: alexandre.malmartel@parisdescartes.fr.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE GLORI-COPD SCORE: GLObal RIsk of severe outcomes in COPD 
patients.
INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a commonly 
under-diagnosed disease. This study aimed to develop a screening tool for COPD 
patients with a high risk of complications, taking into account COPD severity 
and associated co-morbidity.
METHODS: Two Delphi rounds were conducted to select the items for a preliminary 
score. Subsequently, this score was submitted to patients with a possible 
diagnosis of COPD attending for pulmonary function tests in hospital and primary 
care. Items associated with a diagnosis of COPD and its severity were examined 
with multivariate logistic regressions. Associated items in our analyses and in 
the literature were integrated into the score. The score was developed with a 
factorial analysis and optimized according to ROC curves.
RESULTS: Fifteen items were selected with the Delphi method, of which six were 
retained after logistic regression. They were submitted to 64 patients (mean 
age: 59+/-13.6 years). Factors associated with COPD were smoking ≥10 pack-years 
and a history of acute exacerbations. Low levels of activity and coughing up 
sputum were associated with COPD severity. Age ≥40 years and co-morbidities were 
added to the score. According to the factorial analysis, a two-stage score was 
developed assessing first the diagnosis of COPD and then the risk of severe 
outcomes. It showed a sensitivity of 71 %, a specificity of 77 %. The positive 
and negative predictive value were respectively 28 % and 96 %.
CONCLUSION: The score was an acceptable screening tool to identify COPD patients 
with high risk of complications. Nevertheless, validation needs be performed in 
a larger population to allow its use in primary care.

Copyright © 2019 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2019.02.006
PMID: 31010752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 May 23;14:1075-1083. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S195847. eCollection 2019.

Decline in FEV(1) and hospitalized exacerbations in individuals with severe 
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Hiller AM(1), Piitulainen E(1), Jehpsson L(2), Tanash H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Skåne University 
Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, 
Lund, Sweden.

Background and aim: The value of the forced expiratory volume in one second 
(FEV1) is useful in the diagnosis and prognosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). Previous studies on lung function in individuals with severe 
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) have shown a variable annual decline in 
FEV1 (∆FEV1). The aim of this study was to analyze ∆FEV1 and to identify risk 
factors for ∆FEV1 in individuals with severe AATD. Material and methods: Data on 
smoking habits, symptoms, results of lung function tests and exacerbations were 
obtained from the Swedish AATD Register and the Swedish National Patient 
Register (SNPR). The ∆FEV1 was analyzed by random-effects modeling and adjusted 
for age and FEV1 at baseline. Results: One hundred and four (9%) current 
smokers, 539 (48%) ex-smokers and 489 (43%) never-smokers were included in the 
study and followed-up from 1991 to 2016. A total of 584 (52%) individuals with 
severe AATD had COPD at inclusion. The median (IQR) annual severe exacerbation 
rate was 0.66 (1.4). The adjusted mean ∆FEV1 was significantly higher in the 
current smokers compared with the ex-smokers and never-smokers (70 [95% CI 
56-83] vs 42 [95% CI 36-48] and 32 [95% CI 25-38) mL·yr-1], in the middle-aged 
individuals compared with the young individuals (48 [95% CI 41-55] vs 32 [95% CI 
18-45] mL·yr-1), in the individuals with respiratory symptoms at inclusion 
compared with the asymptomatic individuals (46 [95% CI 40-52] vs 30 [95% CI 
22-38]mL·yr-1), and in the individuals with frequent exacerbations compared with 
those with infrequent exacerbations (57 [95% CI 47-68] vs 27 [95% CI 17-37] 
mL·yr-1). Conclusion: Active smoking, age, respiratory symptoms at baseline and 
repeated severe exacerbations of COPD are factors associated with an accelerated 
decline of lung function in individuals with severe AATD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S195847
PMCID: PMC6536893
PMID: 31213789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors alone are responsible for the 
content and writing of the paper. The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


256. N Engl J Med. 2019 Dec 12;381(24):2304-2314. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1908142. Epub 
2019 Oct 20.

Metoprolol for the Prevention of Acute Exacerbations of COPD.

Dransfield MT(1), Voelker H(1), Bhatt SP(1), Brenner K(1), Casaburi R(1), Come 
CE(1), Cooper JAD(1), Criner GJ(1), Curtis JL(1), Han MK(1), Hatipoğlu U(1), 
Helgeson ES(1), Jain VV(1), Kalhan R(1), Kaminsky D(1), Kaner R(1), Kunisaki 
KM(1), Lambert AA(1), Lammi MR(1), Lindberg S(1), Make BJ(1), Martinez FJ(1), 
McEvoy C(1), Panos RJ(1), Reed RM(1), Scanlon PD(1), Sciurba FC(1), Smith A(1), 
Sriram PS(1), Stringer WW(1), Weingarten JA(1), Wells JM(1), Westfall E(1), 
Lazarus SC(1), Connett JE(1); BLOCK COPD Trial Group.

Collaborators: Cooper A, Smith P, Come CE, Mercugliano CM, MacLean ES, Holmes 
EA, Zinchuk KM, Panos R, Kersey K, Lach L, Hatipoglu U, Attaway A, Suri A, 
Al-Jaghbeer M, Dudekonda S, Raza M, Rice R, Brinker J, Brenner K, Easthausen I, 
Choudhury MA, Srinivasan M, Sajjad S, Opara O, McEvoy CE, Neuenfeldt PJ, Sasse 
C, Stringer W, Casaburi R, Rossiter H, Porszasz J, Diaz L, Indelicato R, 
Lopez-Garcia C, Calmelat R, Cavanaugh D, Lammi MR, Romaine C, Sandi M, Lauto P, 
Scanlon PD, Clain J, Niven A, Dulohery Scrodin M, Andrist B, English A, Krpata 
TS, Kunisaki K, Campbell M, DeConcini M, Melzer A, Wendt C, Wetherbee E, 
DeCarolis D, Make B, Lommatzsch S, Sergew A, Underwood J, Kaner RJ, Martinez FJ, 
Harvey BG, Libby D, Libby L, Gelbman B, Chappell Weir D, Shioleno A, Krishnan J, 
Zhengyang Zhang W, Peters E, Morris AJ, Marcelino M, Weingarten J, Saleh A, 
Shahzad S, George L, Gross L, Chadha P, Edwards C, Smith A, Ingenito S, Kalhan 
R, Rosenberg S, Smith L, Hixon J, Rogowski A, Frederick A, Lambert AA, Alicic R, 
DeCato T, Davis L, Lebo D, Jacobs M, Criner G, Marchetti N, Criner H, Fehrle D, 
Lambert J, Dransfield M, Bhatt S, Wells JM, Iyer A, Parekh T, Lloyd S, Payne G, 
McElwee S, Westfall E, Mathews K, Holmes R, Jain V, Allison DR, McClain J, 
Blaauw J, Aguilar G, Lopez A, Lazarus SC, Woodruff PG, Silva J, Reed R, Netzer 
G, Patel A, Deeley M, Borgan SM, Haddadin S, Radhi H, Haji HA, Marvania N, Han 
MK, Labaki W, Hamby MK, Connett JE, Wendt C, Lindberg S, Voelker H, Olson I, 
Sciurba F, Chandra D, Bon Field J, O'Brien ME, Riley C, Consolaro P, D'Innocenzo 
M, Elliott K, Ledezma C, Smith J, Stempkowski E, Arminavage D, Wilson R, Lincoln 
R, Kaminsky DA, Gonyaw E, Housenger C, Hodgdon K, Pecott-Grimm H, Curtis JL, 
McCloskey L, Hansel N, Bittner V, Tonascia J, Snyder S, Kayyali U.

Author information:
(1)From the Lung Health Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham (M.T.D., 
S.P.B., J.M.W., E.W.), and Birmingham Veterans Affairs (VA) Medical Center 
(M.T.D., J.A.D.C., J.M.W.) - both in Birmingham; the University of Minnesota 
(H.V., E.S.H., S.L., J.E.C.) and the Minneapolis VA Medical Center (K.M.K.), 
Minneapolis, HealthPartners Minnesota, Bloomington (C.M.), and Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester (P.D.S.) - all in Minnesota; New York-Presbyterian (NYP)-Columbia 
University Medical Center (K.B.), NYP-Weill Cornell Medical Center (R. Kaner, 
F.J.M.), NYP-Queens Medical Center (A.S.), and NYP-Brooklyn Methodist Medical 
Center (J.A.W.) - all in New York; Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation 
at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles (R.C., W.W.S.), the University of 
California, San Francisco-Fresno, Fresno (V.V.J.), and the University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco (S.C.L.) - all in California; Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston (C.E.C.); Temple University School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia (G.J.C.); the Ann Arbor VA Medical Center (J.L.C.) and the 
University of Michigan Health System (M.K.H.) - both in Ann Arbor; the Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland (U.H.); Northwestern University, Chicago (R. Kalhan); the 
University of Vermont, Burlington (D.K.); the University of Washington, Seattle 
(A.A.L.); Louisiana State University, New Orleans (M.R.L.); National Jewish 
Health, Denver (B.J.M.); the Cincinnati VA Medical Center, Cincinnati (R.J.P.); 
the University of Maryland, Baltimore (R.M.R.); the University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh (F.C.S.); and North Florida-South Georgia Veterans Health System, 
Gainesville (P.S.S.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Dec 12;381(24):2367-2368.
    N Engl J Med. 2020 Apr 2;382(14):1374.
    N Engl J Med. 2020 Apr 2;382(14):1374-1375.
    N Engl J Med. 2020 Apr 2;382(14):1375.

BACKGROUND: Observational studies suggest that beta-blockers may reduce the risk 
of exacerbations and death in patients with moderate or severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but these findings have not been confirmed 
in randomized trials.
METHODS: In this prospective, randomized trial, we assigned patients between the 
ages of 40 and 85 years who had COPD to receive either a beta-blocker 
(extended-release metoprolol) or placebo. All the patients had a clinical 
history of COPD, along with moderate airflow limitation and an increased risk of 
exacerbations, as evidenced by a history of exacerbations during the previous 
year or the prescribed use of supplemental oxygen. We excluded patients who were 
already taking a beta-blocker or who had an established indication for the use 
of such drugs. The primary end point was the time until the first exacerbation 
of COPD during the treatment period, which ranged from 336 to 350 days, 
depending on the adjusted dose of metoprolol.
RESULTS: A total of 532 patients underwent randomization. The mean (±SD) age of 
the patients was 65.0±7.8 years; the mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
(FEV1) was 41.1±16.3% of the predicted value. The trial was stopped early 
because of futility with respect to the primary end point and safety concerns. 
There was no significant between-group difference in the median time until the 
first exacerbation, which was 202 days in the metoprolol group and 222 days in 
the placebo group (hazard ratio for metoprolol vs. placebo, 1.05; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.84 to 1.32; P = 0.66). Metoprolol was associated with a higher 
risk of exacerbation leading to hospitalization (hazard ratio, 1.91; 95% CI, 
1.29 to 2.83). The frequency of side effects that were possibly related to 
metoprolol was similar in the two groups, as was the overall rate of 
nonrespiratory serious adverse events. During the treatment period, there were 
11 deaths in the metoprolol group and 5 in the placebo group.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with moderate or severe COPD who did not have an 
established indication for beta-blocker use, the time until the first COPD 
exacerbation was similar in the metoprolol group and the placebo group. 
Hospitalization for exacerbation was more common among the patients treated with 
metoprolol. (Funded by the Department of Defense; BLOCK COPD ClinicalTrials.gov 
number, NCT02587351.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1908142
PMID: 31633896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Ir J Med Sci. 2019 Nov;188(4):1251-1259. doi: 10.1007/s11845-019-02001-y. Epub 
2019 Mar 28.

Improvement in health status with once-daily indacaterol/glycopyrronium 
110/50 μg in COPD patients: real-world evidence from an observational study in 
Ireland.

O'Doherty B(1), Dorman J(2), McGrath K(3), Kelly K(4), Molony D(5), Lacey S(6), 
Whelan S(7), Schmid S(8), Sullivan S(9).

Author information:
(1)Gorey Medical Centre, Conal House, St. Michaels Road Gorey, Co. Wexford, 
Ireland.
(2)6 The Mall, Rathquarter, Sligo, Ireland.
(3)SantryGP.ie Clinic, Unit 1 Northwood House, Northwood Business Park, Santry, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Western House Medical Centre, Western Rd, Clonmel, Co. Tipperary, Ireland.
(5)The Red House Family Practice, Mallow, Co. Cork, Ireland.
(6)Department of Mathematics, Cork Institute of Technology, Rossa Avenue, 
Bishopstown, Cork, T12 P928, Ireland.
(7)Novartis Ireland Limited, Vista Building, Elm Park, Merrion Road, Dublin 4, 
D04 A9N6, Ireland.
(8)Sandoz AG, Square 3, Novartis Campus, Fabrikstrasse 2, 4056, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(9)Novartis Ireland Limited, Vista Building, Elm Park, Merrion Road, Dublin 4, 
D04 A9N6, Ireland. shane.sullivan@novartis.com.

AIMS: Indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) 110/50 μg is a once-daily (o.d.) 
fixed-dose combination of long-acting β2-agonist/long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist approved in over 90 countries, including Ireland, for the management 
of COPD. The present study was conducted to evaluate health status of COPD 
patients, initiated on IND/GLY 110/50 μg o.d., using the Clinical COPD 
Questionnaire (CCQ) tool in a real-world primary care setting in Ireland.
METHODS: This was a real-world, prospective, open-label study. COPD patients 
aged > 40 years and with a smoking history of > 10 pack-years were included and 
switched to once-daily IND/GLY 110/50 μg. Enrolment of patients into the study 
occurred only after the decision had been made by the physician to prescribe 
IND/GLY 110/50 μg. Data were collected at baseline and Week 26. Health status 
was assessed using the validated CCQ.
RESULTS: A total of 200 patients were included in study. The mean CCQ total 
score decreased from 2.36 at baseline to 1.44 at Week 26 (Δ, 0.92; P < 0.0005). 
Of the 156 patients who completed study, 113 (72.4%) achieved minimum clinically 
important difference in CCQ total score with IND/GLY 110/50 μg. CCQ domain 
scores also decreased during the study. Improvement in health status was 
observed across all GOLD groups and irrespective of prior COPD treatment. 
Adverse events were reported by 20% of patients with COPD exacerbation/infected 
COPD being the most common AE, reported by 11 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In real-life clinical practice in Ireland, IND/GLY 110/50 μg o.d. 
demonstrated statistically significant and clinically important improvement in 
health status in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11845-019-02001-y
PMID: 30924006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. COPD. 2019 Apr;16(2):140-151. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1618256. Epub 2019 Jun 
19.

Predictors of Nebulized Arformoterol Treatment: A Retrospective Analysis of 
Medicare Beneficiaries with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Gilmer TP(1), Celli BR(2)(3), Xu Z(1), Cho-Reyes S(4), Dembek C(5), Navaie 
M(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Family Medicine and Public Health, University of California 
San Diego , La Jolla , CA , USA.
(2)b Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA , USA.
(3)c Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
, Boston , MA , USA.
(4)d Advance Health Solutions, LLC , New York , NY , USA.
(5)e Global Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Sunovion Pharmaceuticals 
Inc. , Marlborough , MA , USA.
(6)f School of Professional Studies, Columbia University , New York , NY , USA.

This study examined sociodemographic and clinical characteristics, treatment 
patterns, and health resource utilization among Medicare beneficiaries with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to identify predictors of nebulized 
arformoterol treatment. Using Medicare administrative data from 2010 to 2014, 
beneficiaries with ≥2 COPD outpatient visits ≥30 d apart or ≥1 COPD-related 
hospitalization(s) (ICD-9-CM 491.xx, 492.xx, and 496) were identified. Inclusion 
criteria required ≥1 COPD medication claim(s) and continuous enrollment in Parts 
A, B, and D. Four cohorts were identified: (a) 11,887 arformoterol users, (b) a 
subsample of arformoterol users (n = 1,778) who were hospitalized and discharged 
30 d before initiating arformoterol, (c) 450,178 controls who had not received 
arformoterol, and (d) a subsample of controls (n = 21,910) who had 
hospitalizations. Logistic regression analysis was used to evaluate predictors 
of arformoterol treatment. The majority of beneficiaries were older than 70 
years of age, female, Caucasian, and 47% were dual-eligible. The strongest 
predictors of arformoterol treatment were oxygen therapy, systemic 
corticosteroid or methylxanthine use, an exacerbation, a COPD-related 
hospitalization, and receiving care from a pulmonologist (all p < .001). 
Dual-eligibility, being a racial/ethnic minority, and having severe psychiatric 
comorbidity or immunodeficiency lowered the odds of receiving nebulized 
arformoterol (all p < .001). Among beneficiaries with recent hospitalizations, 
exacerbations and COPD-related admissions increased the odds of receiving 
arformoterol (p < .001). Nebulized arformoterol treatment was more likely to be 
initiated in sicker patients with COPD. Ensuring access to nebulized maintenance 
therapy is important and particularly warranted for COPD populations with 
greater medical needs.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1618256
PMID: 31215259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 22;14:289-296. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S178147. eCollection 2019.

Efficacy of a home discharge care bundle after acute exacerbation of COPD.

Cousse S(1), Gillibert A(2), Salaün M(1)(3), Thiberville L(1)(3), Cuvelier 
A(1)(4), Patout M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary, Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Intensive Care Department, Rouen 
University Hospital, Rouen, France, maxime.patout@chu-rouen.fr.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(3)Normandy University, UNIROUEN, CIC INSERM 1404, Rouen, France.
(4)Normandy University, UNIROUEN, EA3830-GRHV, Institute for Research and 
Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB), Rouen, France, maxime.patout@chu-rouen.fr.

PURPOSE: Acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD) are frequent and associated with a 
poor prognosis. A home discharge care bundle, the PRADO-BPCO program, has been 
set up by the French National Health System in order to reduce readmission rate 
after hospitalization for AECOPD. This program includes early consultations by 
the general practitioner, a nurse, and a physiotherapist after discharge. The 
aim of our study was to evaluate the effect of the PRADO-BPCO program on the 
28-days readmission rate of COPD patients after hospitalization for AECOPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study including all 
patients admitted for AECOPD in our center between November 2015 and January 
2017. The readmission or death rate at 28 days after hospitalization for AECOPD 
was compared between patients included in the PRADO-BPCO program and patients 
with standard care after discharge. Inclusion in the program was decided by the 
physician in charge of the patient.
RESULTS: A total of 62 patients were included in the PRADO-BPCO group and 202 in 
the control group. At baseline, patients in the PRADO group had a more severe 
COPD disease and more severe exacerbations than the control group and mean 
inpatient stay was shorter in the PRADO group: 8.6±4.3 vs 10.4±7.4 days 
(P=0.034). Readmission or death rate at 28 days was similar between groups: 10 
(16.1%) in the PRADO group vs 30 (14.9%) in the control group (P=0.81). 
Ninety-days readmission or death rate and overall survival were similar in the 
two groups.
CONCLUSION: In our center, despite more severe COPD and a shorter 
hospitalization time, the PRADO-BPCO program failed to prove a benefit on the 28 
days readmission or death rate when compared with standard care.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S178147
PMCID: PMC6349078
PMID: 30774326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


260. Respir Care. 2019 Feb;64(2):169-175. doi: 10.4187/respcare.06247. Epub 2018 Dec 
11.

A COPD Case-Finding Program in a Large Cohort of HIV-Infected Persons.

Quiros-Roldan E(1), Pezzoli MC(1), Berlendis M(2), Raffetti E(3), Ferraresi 
A(4), Properzi M(1), Rodari P(1), Castelli F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, University of Brescia and 
Spedali Civili General Hospital, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Pneumology Unit, Spedali Civili General Hospital, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Unit of Hygiene, Brescia University, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, University of Brescia and 
Spedali Civili General Hospital, Brescia, Italy. alice-ferraresi@hotmail.it.

BACKGROUND: COPD screening guidelines in patients with HIV are lacking, and data 
about its under-diagnosis are still limited. This study aimed to determinate the 
feasibility of a case-finding program and the prevalence of COPD under-diagnosis 
in a large cohort of HIV-infected subjects.
METHODS: All out-patients attending their routine visit for HIV monitoring at 
Spedali Civili General Hospital in Brescia, Italy, from February 2015 to January 
2016, were enrolled. The case-finding program was structured in three steps: 
questionnaire administration, pre-bronchodilator spirometry testing measured 
with a portable spirometer, and post-bronchodilator diagnostic spirometry during 
a pulmonology appointment.
RESULTS: A total of 1,463 subjects were included; the average age was 46.2 ± 
10.3 y. Two hundred eighty-two subjects had a positive questionnaire; 190 
completed portable spirometry, and approximately 34% (65 of 190 subjects) 
reported respiratory impairment; of these 65 subjects, 33 completed diagnostic 
spirometry, and 66.7% (22 of 33) showed evidence of COPD, including 2 subjects 
with severe airway obstruction (GOLD stage 3, according to the Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease). High dropout rates were observed in our 
program. Individuals with COPD exacerbations showed lower CD4+ cell counts at 
screening compared to those without acute worsening of symptoms (534 cells/mm3 
for subjects with GOLD 1 exacerbations and 495 cells/mm3 for subjects with GOLD 
2 exacerbations vs 781 cells/mm3 for those without acute worsening of symptoms). 
The positive predictive value of the COPD screening questionnaire and portable 
spirometry was 33.8%.
CONCLUSIONS: COPD may be under-diagnosed in HIV-infected people, and 
case-finding programs are an urgent issue to address as part of routine practice 
in these individuals.

Copyright © 2019 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.06247
PMID: 30538159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Apr 23;14:881-892. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S194991. eCollection 2019.

The relationship between oral health and COPD exacerbations.

Baldomero AK(1)(2), Siddiqui M(3), Lo CY(3)(4), Petersen A(5), Pragman AA(6)(7), 
Connett JE(5), Kunisaki KM(1)(2), Wendt CH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Section, Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Health Care System, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department 
of Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(3)TMD, Orofacial Pain, and Dental Sleep Medicine, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(4)Dental Section, Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Health Care System, Minneapolis, 
MN, USA.
(5)Division of Biostatistics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(6)Infectious Disease Section, Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Health Care System, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(7)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Introduction: Poor oral health has been implicated as an independent risk factor 
for the development of COPD, but few studies have evaluated the association 
between oral health and COPD exacerbations. We aimed to determine if poor oral 
health is associated with COPD exacerbations and/or worse respiratory health. 
Methods: We performed a case-control study of oral health among COPD 
exacerbators and non-exacerbators. Cases (exacerbators) had experienced ≥1 
exacerbation in the previous 12 months, while controls (non-exacerbators) had no 
exacerbations in the previous 24 months. We excluded those with <4 teeth. We 
evaluated the global oral health assessment, Oral Health Impact Profile 
(OHIP-5), dental symptoms/habits, and St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ). In a subset, we performed blinded dental exams to measure bleeding on 
probing, probing depth, clinical attachment loss, periodontitis severity, plaque 
index, gingival index, and carries risk. We evaluated associations between oral 
health and COPD exacerbations using logistic regression. Linear regression was 
used to assess relationships between oral health and SGRQ scores. Results: 
Screened non-exacerbators (n=118) were significantly more likely to have <4 
teeth, compared to screened exacerbators (n=100) (44% vs 30%, respectively; 
p=0.046). After excluding those with <4 teeth, there were 70 cases and 66 
controls. Self-reported oral health and objective dental exam measures did not 
vary significantly between cases vs controls. However, the odds of severe COPD 
exacerbations requiring hospitalizations and/or emergency department visits 
trended higher in those with worse dental exam compared to those with better 
dental exam. Worse OHIP-5 was strongly associated with worse SGRQ scores. 
Conclusions: Oral health status was not related to COPD exacerbations, but was 
associated with self-reported respiratory health. Non-exacerbators were more 
likely to be edentate or have ≤4 teeth compared to exacerbators. Larger studies 
are needed to address oral health as a potential method to improve respiratory 
health in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S194991
PMCID: PMC6497835
PMID: 31114185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KMK has received consulting fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline outside of this submitted work and reports no conflicts of 
interest in this work. All of the other authors report that they have no 
affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any 
financial or non-financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed 
in this manuscript, and have no conflicts of interest in this work.


262. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Jun 10;15:1335-1347. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S252354. eCollection 2020.

Effectiveness and Tolerability of LABA/LAMA Fixed-Dose Combinations 
Aclidinium/Formoterol, Glycopyrronium/Indacaterol and Umeclidinium/Vilanterol in 
the Treatment of COPD in Daily Practice - Results of the Non-Interventional 
DETECT Study.

Plate T(1), Friedrich FW(1), Beier J(2).

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca GmbH, Wedel, Germany.
(2)Insaf - Respiratory Research Institute GmbH, Wiesbaden, Germany.

BACKGROUND: LABA (long-acting β2-agonists) and/or LAMA (long-acting muscarinic 
antagonists) represent the first treatment options for patients with symptomatic 
COPD. Although both display different mechanisms of activity, in combination 
they have a stronger broncho-dilating effect than monotherapy; hence, a 
combination of both LABA and LAMA is particularly recommended for patients whose 
symptoms cannot be sufficiently improved by a single active ingredient. To date, 
only few data have been collected regarding the therapeutic outcomes of approved 
LABA/LAMA fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) under everyday (real-life) conditions 
in non-clinical trial settings.
OBJECTIVE AND METHODS: The main objective of the DETECT study was to investigate 
the impact of aclidinium/formoterol (AB/FF, b.i.d.), glycopyrronium/indacaterol 
(GLY/IND, q.d.) and umeclidinium/vilanterol (UME/VL, q.d.) in patients with COPD 
in daily clinical practice. Therefore, a prospective, non-randomized, 12-month, 
observational study was implemented to assess the effectiveness of these 
treatments in patients who had been switched to FDC within the last 3 months or 
for whom such a changeover was intended. Changes in lung function were analyzed 
by the forced expiratory volume (FEV1) and forced vital capacity (FVC) measures. 
Quality of life and well-being were evaluated by the COPD Assessment Test 
(CAT™). Furthermore, a number of exacerbations and early morning COPD symptoms 
were documented.
RESULTS: In total, 3653 patients were enrolled. FEV1 and FVC values 
significantly improved during the study with AB/FF (increase by 0.09 ± 0.40 L 
and 0.10 ± 0.57 L, respectively; p<0.0001), GLY/IND (0.06±0.38/0.05±0.51 L; 
p<0.0001 and p=0.0025) and UME/VL (0.12±0.39/0.10±0.52 L; p<0.0001). CAT scores 
decreased indicating improved COPD (AB/FF, 4.17±8.30; GLY/IND, 3.66±7.88; 
UME/VL, 4.06±7.96; p<0.0001). Moreover, the number of exacerbations as well as 
early morning COPD symptoms similarly diminished in all treatment groups. A 
comparable proportion of patients with adverse drug reactions was recorded: 
AB/FF, 4.07% of patients; GLY/IND, 3.52%; UME/VL, 3.64%.
CONCLUSION: In summary, AB/FF, GLY/IND and UME/VL provided clinical benefits in 
lung function, quality of life and early morning COPD symptoms in a broad cohort 
of COPD patients under routine medical practice conditions. All three treatments 
were well tolerated.

© 2020 Plate et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S252354
PMCID: PMC7293910
PMID: 32606643

Conflict of interest statement: TP and FWF are employees of AstraZeneca GmbH. JB 
is an employee of insaf – Respiratory Research Institute GmbH and has also 
received consultation fees from AstraZeneca, Berlin Chemie/Menarini, Pohl 
Boskamp, Chiesi and participated in scientific advisory boards that were funded 
by Astra Zeneca, Chiesi. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


263. Lung. 2019 Apr;197(2):173-179. doi: 10.1007/s00408-019-00196-6. Epub 2019 Jan 
29.

Prognostic Accuracy of Three COPD Classification Systems in Relation to 
Long-Term Mortality of COPD Patients: A Prospective Multicenter Study.

Plutinsky M(1), Brat K(2), Svoboda M(3), Zatloukal J(4), Popelkova P(5), 
Koblizek V(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, University Hospital Brno and Faculty of 
Medicine, Masaryk University, Jihlavska 20, 62500, Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Respiratory Diseases, University Hospital Brno and Faculty of 
Medicine, Masaryk University, Jihlavska 20, 62500, Brno, Czech Republic. 
kristian.brat@seznam.cz.
(3)Institute of Biostatistics and Analyses, Ltd., Brno, Czech Republic.
(4)Pulmonary Department, University Hospital Olomouc and Faculty of Medicine, 
Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(5)Pulmonary Department, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(6)Pulmonary Department, University Hospital Hradec Kralove and Charles 
University, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.

Recent research showed group B patients express higher mortality compared to 
group C patients when GOLD A-D grouping is used. We aimed to compare the 
prognostic accuracy of three GOLD classification systems, I-IV ("pre-2011"), A-D 
("2011-2016") and A-D ("2017-present") in relation to mortality, exacerbation 
risk, quality of life (QoL) assessment and specific treatments use in a 
real-life COPD cohort. We used the data of 720 patients from the Czech 
Multicenter Research Database of COPD. Four-year mortality and 
time-to-exacerbation using the GOLD "pre-2011", "2011-2016" and "2017-present" 
classification schemes were assessed. Moreover, distribution of specific 
treatments use and QoL measures were analyzed. The GOLD I-IV classification 
system showed gradual increase in 4-year mortality across the stages (GOLD II 
18.8%, III 28.5%, IV 38.7%) (p = 0.001). Using the A-D "2011-2016" 
classification scheme, group C patients had lower mortality (16.7%) than group B 
(18.7%) (p = 0.009). The A-D "2017-present" classification showed higher 
mortality in group B (25.5%) compared to group C (20%) (p = 0.05). For 
additional outcomes, the GOLD I-IV scheme showed highest match between the 
calculated 4-year exacerbation risk and QoL measures and GOLD stage/grouping. In 
terms of specific treatment distributions, various patterns for each GOLD 
classification system were observed with best match of GOLD "2017-present" 
system to the layout of GOLD groups and categories. We conclude the GOLD I-IV 
classification system had the highest accuracy related to mortality, QoL 
measures and exacerbation risk prediction, while the A-D "2017-present" scheme 
was most accurate within severity of symptoms prediction reflected also by more 
frequent specific treatments use.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-019-00196-6
PMID: 30694380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2019 Jul 23;14(7):e0219962. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0219962. 
eCollection 2019.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease upper airway microbiome is associated with 
select clinical characteristics.

Pragman AA(1), Knutson KA(2), Gould TJ(3), Hodgson SW(4), Isaacson RE(5), Reilly 
CS(2), Wendt CH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Medical Center and 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.
(2)Division of Biostatistics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
United States of America.
(3)University of Minnesota Informatics Institute, University of Minnesota, St. 
Paul, Minnesota, United States of America.
(4)Research Service, Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, United States of America.
(5)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
St. Paul, Minnesota, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an inflammatory lung 
disorder associated with lung microbiome dysbiosis. Although the upper airway 
microbiome is the source of the lung microbiome, the relationships between the 
oral, nasal, and sputum microbiota are incompletely understood. Our objective 
was to determine features that differentiate the oral, nasal, and sputum 
microbiome among subjects with stable COPD.
METHODS: We recruited 15 current or former smokers to provide oral and sputum 
samples on day 1. On day 2, another oral sample and a nasal sample were 
obtained. Each sample and control underwent DNA extraction, 16S V4 rRNA 
amplification, 16S V4 sequencing, and qPCR of 16S rRNA. Data were analyzed using 
dada2 and R.
RESULTS: Most (14 of 15) subjects were male with a mean age of 65.2. One subject 
had no pulmonary obstruction, while 5 had mild COPD, 7 had moderate COPD, and 2 
had severe COPD. Three subjects (20%) were current tobacco users and 2 subjects 
(13%) used inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). Subjects had a mean of 49.1 pack-years 
of tobacco exposure. Bacterial biomass was associated with anatomic site, but no 
differences in biomass were observed with age, FEV1 percent predicted (FEV1pp), 
ICS use, smoking status, or edentulous state. Shannon index was associated with 
site (lower nasal diversity than oral and sputum diversity, p<0.001), but not 
age, ICS use, FEV1pp, tobacco use, or edentulous state. β-diversity was 
illustrated by principal coordinate analysis using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity and 
PERMANOVA analyses, showing sample clustering by anatomic site (p = 0.001) with 
nasal samples forming a cluster separate from the combined oral wash samples and 
sputum samples. Clustering was also observed with ICS use (p = 0.029) and 
edentulous state (p = 0.019), while FEV1pp and current tobacco use were not 
significant. In an amplicon sequencing variant (ASV)-level analysis of oral 
samples using a linear regression model with Benjamini-Hochberg correction at an 
FDR<0.10, 10 ASVs were associated with age while no ASVs were associated with 
FEV1pp or smoking status. Sputum sample analysis demonstrated that 51 ASVs (25 
unique genera) were associated with age, 61 ASVs (32 genera) were associated 
with FEV1pp, and no ASVs were associated with smoking status. In a combined 
dataset, the frequent exacerbator phenotype, rather than ICS use, was associated 
with decreased sputum Shannon diversity.
CONCLUSIONS: Among the upper airway microbiota of COPD subjects, anatomic site 
was associated with bacterial biomass, Shannon diversity, and β-diversity. ICS 
use and edentulous state were both associated with β-diversity. Age was 
associated with taxa relative abundance in oral and sputum samples, while FEV1pp 
was associated with taxa relative abundance in sputum samples only.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0219962
PMCID: PMC6650084
PMID: 31335912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


265. J Thorac Dis. 2019 Jun;11(6):2324-2331. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2019.06.14.

Clinical characteristics and economic burden of tuberculous-destroyed lung in 
Korea: a National Health Insurance Service-National Sample Cohort-based study.

Lee HY(1), Han DJ(1), Kim KJ(1), Kim TH(2), Oh YM(3), Rhee CK(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal medicine, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, 
Seongnam, Korea.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Clinical Research Center 
for Chronic Obstructive Airway Diseases, Asan Medical Center, University of 
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Tuberculous destroyed lung (TDL) contributes to patient mortality 
via acute exacerbation and combined medical comorbidities. This study 
characterized the clinical characteristics and economic burden of patients with 
TDL using large scale database, Health Insurance Review and Assessment Service 
(HIRA) data.
METHODS: We searched the HIRA national database to identify patients diagnosed 
with TDL from January 01, 2011 to December 31, 2015. The clinical 
characteristics of the patients were collected and the 5-year claims data were 
analyzed.
RESULTS: In total, 645,031 patients (55% male, mean age, 59.6 years) were 
enrolled over the 5 years. During the study period, 98.5% of the patients 
visited a primary care clinic and 71.1% and 93.2% visited secondary and tertiary 
hospitals, respectively. Patients spent a median of 5 days for inpatient 
services, and were admitted to the hospital a median of 0.62±1.2 times per 
person annually. Annual total cost per person was $1,838 and half of the total 
cost was expended for inpatient services. About 68.9% of the patients were 
prescribed respiratory medications, and $12 million was paid. Oral 
bronchodilators (46.5%) and methylxanthine (35.2%) were used more frequently 
than inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs)/long-acting β2 agonist (LABA) combination 
agents (11.6%) or inhaled long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) (7.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: TDL imposes a high medical economic burden in Korea. The estimated 
economic costs were mainly made up of inpatient services and outpatient 
medication prescriptions. Interventions to prevent acute disease exacerbations 
and progression of comorbid conditions should be accompanied to alleviate the 
clinical and economic burden of TDL.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.06.14
PMCID: PMC6626788
PMID: 31372269

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.


266. Respir Res. 2019 May 14;20(1):89. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1053-7.

Importance of the relationship between symptoms and self-reported physical 
activity level in stable COPD based on the results from the SPACE study.

Mihaltan F(1), Adir Y(2), Antczak A(3), Porpodis K(4), Radulovic V(5), Pires 
N(6), de Vries GJ(7), Horner A(8), De Bontridder S(9), Chen Y(10), Shavit A(11), 
Alecu S(12), Adamek L(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Carol 
Davila", Bucharest, Romania. mihaltan@starnets.ro.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(3)Clinical Department of Pulmonology and Allergology, University Hospital, 
Lodz, Poland.
(4)Thessaloniki University Medical School, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(5)Municipal Institute for Lung Diseases and Tuberculosis, Belgrade, Serbia.
(6)Hospital Santa Maria Maior, Barcelos, Portugal.
(7)Zuyderland Ziekenhuis Sittard, Geleen, Netherlands.
(8)Kepler University Hospital, Krankenhausstrasse 9, A4021, Linz, Austria.
(9)UZ Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090, Jette, Belgium.
(10)AstraZeneca Global R&D Information, Shanghai, China.
(11)AstraZeneca Germany, Wedel, Germany.
(12)AstraZeneca Romania, Bucharest, Romania.
(13)AstraZeneca Europe, Luton, UK.

BACKGROUND: The burden of symptoms and risk of exacerbations are the main 
drivers of the overall assessment of the Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
(COPD) and the adequate treatment approaches per current Global Initiative for 
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD). Physical activity has emerged as both 
functional outcome and non-pharmacological intervention in COPD patients, 
despite the lack of standardized measures or guidelines in clinical practice. 
This study aimed to explore in more depth the 24-h respiratory symptoms, the 
physical activity level (PAL) and the relationship between these two 
determinants in stable COPD patients.
METHODS: This was a multinational, multicenter, observational, cross-sectional 
study conducted in ten European countries and Israel. Dedicated questionnaires 
for each part of the day (morning, daytime, night) were used to assess 
respiratory symptoms. PAL was evaluated with self- and interview-reported tools 
[EVS (exercise as vital sign) and YPAS (Yale Physical Activity Survey)], and 
physician's judgement. Patients were stratified in ABCD groups by 2013 and 2017 
GOLD editions using the questionnaires currently recommended: modified Medical 
Research Council dyspnea scale and COPD Assessment Test.
RESULTS: The study enrolled 2190 patients (mean age: 66.9 years; male: 70.0%; 
mean % predicted FEV1: 52.6; GOLD groups II-III: 84.5%; any COPD treatment: 
98.9%). Most patients (> 90%) reported symptoms in any part of the 24-h day, 
irrespective of COPD severity. PAL evaluations showed discordant results between 
patients and physicians: 32.9% of patients considered themselves completely 
inactive, while physicians judged 11.9% patients as inactive. By YPAS, the 
overall study population spent an average of 21.0 h/week performing physical 
activity, and 68.4% of patients were identified as sedentary. In any GOLD ABCD 
group, the percentage of inactive patients was high. Our study found negative, 
weak correlations between respiratory symptoms and self-reported PAL 
(p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite regular treatment, the majority of stable COPD patients 
with moderate to severe disease experienced daily variable symptoms. Physical 
activity level was low in this COPD cohort, and yet overestimated by physicians. 
With evidence indicating the negative consequences of inactivity, its adequate 
screening, a more active promotion and regular assessment of physical activity 
are urgently needed in COPD patients for better outcomes.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT03031769 , retrospectively registered, 23 Jan 2017.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1053-7
PMCID: PMC6518503
PMID: 31088560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study and the informed consent form were approved by Institutional Review Boards 
or Ethics Committees in each participating country according to the local 
applicable legislation on observational studies. All patients provided their 
written informed consent before enrollment. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: YC, AS, SA, AL are Employees of AstraZeneca. 
All the other authors have no competing interests to declare in regard to this 
study. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


267. Biomedica. 2019 Dec 1;39(4):748-758. doi: 10.7705/biomedica.4815.

Frequency of emergency department visits and hospitalizations due to chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations in patients included in two models 
of care.

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Alí A(1), Giraldo-Cadavid LF, Karpf E, Quintero LA, Aguirre CE, Rincón E, 
Vejarano AI, Perlaza I, Torres-Duque CA, Casas A.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Investigación, Fundación Neumológica Colombiana, Bogotá, 
D.C., Colombia. aali@neumologica.org.

INTRODUCTION: Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have 
a huge impact on lung function, quality of life and mortality of patients. 
Emergency Department visits and hospitalizations due to exacerbations cause a 
significant economic burden on the health system.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the differences in the number of emergency visits and 
hospitalizations due to exacerbations of COPD among patients included in two 
models of care of the same institution.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A historical cohort study in which COPD patients who are 
users of two models of care were included: COPD integrated care program (CICP) 
and general consultation of pulmonology (GCP). The first model, unlike the 
second one, offers additional educational activities, 24/7 telephone service, 
and priority consultations. The number of emergency visits and hospitalizations 
due to COPD exacerbations in patients who had completed at least one year of 
follow-up was evaluated. The multivariable Poisson regression model was used for 
calculating the incidence rate (IR) and the incidence rate ratio (IRR) with an 
adjustment for confounding factors.
RESULTS: We included 316 COPD patients (166 from the CICP and 150 from the GCP). 
During the year of follow-up, the CICP patients had 50% fewer emergency visits 
and hospitalizations than patients from the GCP (IRR=0.50, 95%CI: 0.29-0.87, 
p=0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: COPD patients in the CICP had fewer emergency visits and 
hospitalizations due to exacerbations. Prospective clinical studies are required 
to confirm the results and to evaluate the factors that contribute to the 
differences.

Publisher: Introducción. Las exacerbaciones de la enfermedad pulmonar 
obstructiva crónica (EPOC) tienen un gran impacto en la función pulmonar, la 
calidad de vida y la mortalidad de los pacientes. Las visitas al Departamento de 
Emergencias y las hospitalizaciones debido a las exacerbaciones, causan una 
carga económica importante para el sistema de salud. Objetivo. Describir las 
diferencias en el número de visitas de emergencia y hospitalizaciones debidas a 
exacerbaciones de la EPOC, entre los pacientes incluidos en dos modelos de 
atención de la misma institución. Materiales y métodos. Se trata de un estudio 
de cohorte histórica en el que se incluyeron pacientes que son usuarios de dos 
modelos de atención: el programa de atención integrada de la EPOC (CICP) y la 
consulta general de neumología (PCG). El primer modelo, a diferencia del 
segundo, ofrece actividades educativas adicionales, servicio telefónico las 24 
horas del día y consultas prioritarias. Se evaluó el número de visitas de 
emergencia y hospitalizaciones debido a exacerbaciones de la EPOC en pacientes 
que habían completado, al menos, un año de seguimiento. Se utilizó el modelo de 
regresión multivariable de Poisson para calcular la tasa de incidencia (IR) y la 
razón de tasas de incidencia (IRR), con un ajuste para factores de confusión. 
Resultados. Se incluyeron 316 pacientes con EPOC, 166 del CICP y 150 de la PCG. 
Durante el año de seguimiento, los pacientes en el CICP tuvieron 50 % menos 
visitas de emergencia y hospitalizaciones que los pacientes en la PCG (IRR=0,50; 
IC95% 0,29-0,87; p=0,014). Conclusiones. Los pacientes con EPOC en el CICP, 
tuvieron menos visitas de emergencia y hospitalizaciones debido a las 
exacerbaciones. Se requieren estudios clínicos prospectivos para confirmar los 
resultados y evaluar los factores que contribuyen a las diferencias.

DOI: 10.7705/biomedica.4815
PMID: 31860185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Med Arch. 2019 Apr;73(2):72-75. doi: 10.5455/medarh.2019.73.72-75.

Beta-blocker Use in Moderate and Severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Zvizdic F(1), Begic E(2)(3), Mujakovic A(4)(5), Hodzic E(6), Prnjavorac B(4)(7), 
Bedak O(7), Custovic F(3), Bradaric H(8), Durak-Nalbantic A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department for Cardiology, Clinic for Heart, Blood Vessel and Rheumatic 
Diseases, Clinical Center University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Sarajevo Medical School, Sarajevo School of 
Science and Technology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(3)Department of Cardiology, General Hospital "Prim. Dr. Abdulah Nakas", 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(4)Department of Pathophysiology, Sarajevo Medical School, Sarajevo School of 
Science and Technology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, General Hospital "Prim. Dr. Abdulah Nakas", 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(6)Intensive Care Unit, Clinic for Heart, Blood Vessel and Rheumatic Diseases, 
Clinical Center University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, General Hospital, Tesanj, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
(8)Health Care Centre Maglaj, Maglaj, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

INTRODUCTION: The most appropriate choice of pharmacological treatment of heart 
rhythm disorders occurring in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) and cardiovascular comorbidity is often a topic of debate between 
pulmonologists and cardiologists in clinical practice, although numerous studies 
and clinical trials have demonstrated evidence to support the use of selective 
beta-blockers (BBs) in these patients.
AIM: To examine the difference in the number of exacerbations in patients 
treated with a combination of verapamil and digoxin or BB alone in patients with 
different COPD stages.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study included 68 patients (n = 68) diagnosed with 
COPD who were followed-up during a 12-month period, and the number of 
exacerbations were analyzed. The patients were divided into two groups according 
to the stage of COPD: GOLD II (moderate), and GOLD III (severe), and in each 
group a subdivision was established in relation to the use of either a 
combination of verapamil and digoxin or the use of BBs alone in pharmacological 
treatment. The inclusion criteria for patients were defined as following: a) 
established diagnosis of COPD according to present or deteriorated relevant 
clinical symptoms and signs, b) the ejection fraction (EF) of a left ventricle 
(LV) >35%, and c) spirometric cut-points classified as GOLD II (FEV1 / FVC <0.7, 
FEV1 predicted 50-80%), or GOLD III (FEV1/FVC <0.7, FEV1 predicted 30-50%) stage 
of the COPD. The exclusion criteria were EF of LV <35% and a lethal outcome 
during a follow-up period (2 patients were encountered). Exacerbation was 
defined as functional deterioration of the COPD symptoms verified by spirometric 
functional testing, frequency of hospitalizations according to GOLD stage 
assignment or verified clinical symptoms deterioration.
RESULTS: Regardless the pharmacological treatment, there is a statistically 
significant increase in the number of COPD exacerbations, in a 12-month period 
follow-up, in the GOLD III group (severe) compared to the GOLD II group 
(moderate). In the group of patients taking verapamil and digoxin, a two-tailed 
t-test was used to analyze the results between the GOLD II and GOLD III stage 
groups, p = 0.01, and 2. In the group of patients taking BBs, a two-tailed 
t-test was also used to analyze the results between the GOLD II and GOLD III 
stage groups, p = 0.003). Within the COPD GOLD II stage group, there appears to 
be no statistically significant difference in the number of exacerbations 
between the patients taking verapamil and digoxin (n = 24) and the patients 
taking BBs alone (n = 15), although, in patients taking BBs alone, there appears 
to be a trend towards a decrease in the exacerbations compared to the number of 
exacerbations in patients taking verapamil and digoxin (p = 0.007). Within the 
COPD GOLD III stage group, there is no difference in the number of exacerbations 
between the patients taking verapamil and digoxin (n = 20), and the patients 
taking BBs alone (n = 9), as analyzed by a two-tailed t-test, p = 0.577.
CONCLUSION: Use of selective BBs in the treatment of cardiovascular comorbidity 
in patients with COPD represents a far better choice of pharmacological approach 
in the treatment of patients diagnosed with COPD GOLD II (moderate) stage.

DOI: 10.5455/medarh.2019.73.72-75
PMCID: PMC6643359
PMID: 31391690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Rev Med Liege. 2019 Nov;74(11):566-571.

[Telemonitoring of severe COPD patients].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Van Cauwenberge H(1), Delroualle A(1), Hans B(1), Nguyen Dang D(1), Corhay 
JL(1), Louis R(1), Gillet P(2).

Author information:
(1)Service de Pneumologie, CHU Liège, Belgique.
(2)Direction Médicale, CHU Liège, Belgique.

Following a solicitation of INAMI in 2016, a team of the CHU Liège pneumology 
department has proposed a telemonitoring pilot project in severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients. The main objective of the study 
was to reduce the number of hospitalizations for COPD exacerbation. The patients 
included in the study had been at least hospitalized once in 12 months before 
the beginning of the telemonitoring. A close collaboration with the general 
practitioner was required. Patients were educated in the manipulation of the 
application and connected objects. The numerous technical difficulties 
encountered limited the number of patients studied within the short time allowed 
by INAMI. However, some interesting observations could be made and a first 
experience in the field acquired. A project on a large scale seems necessary.

Publisher: Suite à un appel lancé par l’INAMI en 2016, une équipe de soins du 
Service de Pneumologie du CHU de Liège a proposé un projet pilote de 
télé-monitoring de patients souffrant de bronchopneumopathie chronique 
obstructive (BPCO) sévère dont l’objectif principal était de réduire le nombre 
de ré-hospitalisations pour exacerbation de BPCO. Les patients sélectionnés 
étaient des patients sévèrement atteints et ayant été au moins hospitalisés une 
fois dans les 12 mois précédant la mise en place de la surveillance à distance. 
Une collaboration étroite avec le médecin généraliste était requise. Les 
patients ont été éduqués à la manipulation de l’application et des objets 
connectés proposés. Les nombreuses difficultés techniques rencontrées ont limité 
le nombre de patients étudiés dans les délais courts autorisés par l’INAMI. 
Cependant, quelques observations intéressantes ont pu être faites et une 
première expérience dans le domaine a été acquise. Un projet à plus grande 
échelle paraît nécessaire.

PMID: 31729844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Pathol Int. 2019 Apr;69(4):187-192. doi: 10.1111/pin.12776. Epub 2019 Mar 4.

Appearance of large scavenger receptor A-positive cells in peripheral blood: A 
potential risk factor for severe exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Emura I(1), Usuda H(1), Satou K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Japanese Red Cross Nagaoka Hospital, 
Nagaoka City, Niigata Prefecture, Japan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Japanese Red Cross Nagaoka Hospital, Nagaoka 
City, Niigata Prefecture, Japan.

Fresh peripheral blood (PB) samples from 432 outpatients with stable chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were examined. Patients were classified 
into Group A (large SRA+ cells were undetected) and Group B (large SRA+ cells 
were detected) and followed-up for 1 year. Patients were further subdivided 
according to Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
stage. Cox proportional hazard model had shown that Gold, Group, home oxygen 
therapy (HOT), and treatment were significant predictors of severe exacerbation. 
Six of 353 patients in Group A and 29 of 79 in Group B developed severe 
exacerbation. The rates of severe exacerbation were significantly higher in 
Group B patients, GOLD stage 2 than Group A, GOLD stage 2; in Group B, GOLD 
stage 3 than Group A, GOLD stage 3; and in all of Group B compared with in all 
of Group A. The Kaplan-Meier curves of Group B, GOLD stages 1-4, and of all of 
Group B showed significantly worse rates of severe exacerbation than those of 
Group A, Gold 1-4, and all of Group A, respectively. The appearance of large 
SRA+ cells in the PB of patients with stable COPD may represent a useful 
biomarker for severe COPD exacerbation.

© 2019 The Authors. undefined Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/pin.12776
PMCID: PMC6849865
PMID: 30830714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. COPD. 2019 Aug;16(3-4):234-239. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1646716. Epub 2019 
Aug 12.

Polypharmacy among Older Individuals with COPD: Trends between 2000 and 2015 in 
Quebec, Canada.

Sirois C(1)(2)(3), Ouali A(1), Simard M(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval , Québec , Canada.
(2)Institut national de santé publique du Québec , Québec , Canada.
(3)Centre d'excellence sur le vieillissement de Québec , Québec , Canada.

The treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and concomitant 
diseases requires several medications. Yet there is little data on how the 
pharmacological burden progressed over time among older individuals with COPD. 
We aimed to: 1) describe the proportion of older adults with COPD in Quebec, 
Canada, that were exposed to polypharmacy (≥10, ≥15 or ≥20 medications/year) 
between 2000 and 2015; 2) calculate the proportion of individuals receiving 
specific prescriptions for COPD during this period. We conducted a 
population-based cohort study with the Quebec Integrated Chronic Disease 
Surveillance System. Individuals aged ≥66 years with COPD and covered by the 
universal public drug plan were included. We calculated the total number of 
drugs used at least once by each individual during each of the studied years, 
and used age-standardized proportions to compare proportions of users between 
the years. The average number of drugs used increased from 12.0 in 2000 to 14.8 
in 2015. The proportion of individuals exposed to polypharmacy increased (≥10 
drugs: 62.0% to 74.6%;≥15 drugs: 31.2% to 45.4%; ≥20 drugs: 12.3% to 22.4%). The 
proportion of individuals receiving long-acting bronchodilators increased from 
18.7% in 2000 to 69.6% in 2015. The use of short-acting bronchodilators 
decreased from 81.5% to 67.9%, and that of inhaled corticosteroids from 60.6% to 
26.0%. The proportion of users of methylxanthines decreased from 15.0% to 1.9%. 
Older individuals with COPD are increasingly exposed to polypharmacy. 
Identifying which polypharmacy is beneficial is a priority.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1646716
PMID: 31401851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2019 May;13(5):459-470. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2019.1601559. Epub 2019 Apr 8.

Pharmacogenomics of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Hersh CP(1).

Author information:
(1)a Channing Division of Network Medicine and Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine , Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School , 
Boston , MA , USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a heterogeneous condition, which 
presents the opportunity for precision therapy based on genetics or other 
biomarkers. Areas covered: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, a genetic form of 
emphysema, provides an example of this precision approach to diagnosis and 
therapy. To date, research in COPD pharmacogenomics has been limited by small 
sample sizes, lack of accessible target tissue, failure to consider COPD 
subtypes, and different outcomes relevant for various medications. There have 
been several published genome-wide association studies and other omics studies 
in COPD pharmacogenomics; however, clinical implementation remains far away. 
There is a growing evidence base for precision prescription of inhaled 
corticosteroids in COPD, based on clinical phenotypes and blood biomarkers, but 
not yet based on pharmacogenomics. Expert opinion: At this time, there is 
insufficient evidence for clinical implementation of COPD pharmacogenomics. 
Additional genome-wide studies will be required to discover predictors of drug 
response and to identify genomic biomarkers of COPD subtypes, which could be 
targeted with subtype-directed therapies.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2019.1601559
PMCID: PMC6482089
PMID: 30925849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Lung. 2019 Oct;197(5):565-572. doi: 10.1007/s00408-019-00263-y. Epub 2019 Aug 
26.

Comparative Study of Cytokine Levels in Different Respiratory Samples in 
Mild-to-Moderate AECOPD Patients.

Hao W(1)(2), Li M(3), Zhang Y(4), Zhang C(4), Wang P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Yan'an 
University, Yan'an, 716099, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. 
hwdokgood@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi, People's Republic 
of China. hwdokgood@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi, People's Republic 
of China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Yan'an 
University, Yan'an, 716099, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Matrix metalloproteinase-12 (MMP-12) and Tissue inhibitor of 
metalloproteinase-4 (TIMP-4) play important roles in the pathophysiology of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Subjects of many previous studies 
were patients with severe and very severe COPD. However, there are comparatively 
few studies on patients with mild-to-moderate COPD. Our aim was to measure 
MMP-12 and TIMP-4 levels and to compare its levels in various materials in 
patients with mild-to-moderate acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (AECOPD). We also compared which of the two materials of these 
biomarkers was better correlated with disease severity and DODE index.
METHODS: A total of 39 patients with AECOPD and 25 control subjects were 
enrolled in our study. MMP-12 and TIMP-4 in different respiratory samples were 
detected by ELISA.
RESULTS: Expression levels of MMP-12 in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and 
exhaled breath condensate (EBC) and TIMP-4 in BALF were significantly higher in 
AECOPD patients than that in healthy subjects (P < 0.001). However, there was no 
significant difference in TIMP-4 level in EBC of AECOPD patients compared to 
healthy subjects (P = 0.0527). The levels of MMP-12 in BALF and EBC and TIMP-4 
in BAFL of AECOPD patients were significantly correlated with FEV1% predicted 
(P < 0.001). However, in AECOPD patients, there was no significant correlation 
between TIMP-4 levels in EBC and BODE index (r = 0.4175, P = 0.0559).
CONCLUSION: During mild-to-moderate AECOPD, the levels of MMP-12 and TIMP-4 in 
BALF were better correlated with FEV1% predicted and BODE index than that in 
EBC, indicating that they may be new target interventions for pharmacology to 
prevent and/or treat AECOPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-019-00263-y
PMID: 31451927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. JAMA. 2019 May 7;321(17):1693-1701. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.4973.

Effect of Aclidinium Bromide on Major Cardiovascular Events and Exacerbations in 
High-Risk Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: The ASCENT-COPD 
Randomized Clinical Trial.

Wise RA(1), Chapman KR(2), Scirica BM(3)(4), Bhatt DL(3)(4), Daoud SZ(5), 
Zetterstrand S(6), Reisner C(5), Gil EG(7).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)AstraZeneca Research and Development Centre, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(6)AstraZeneca Research and Development, Bioinformatics and Information 
Sciences, Mölndal, Sweden.
(7)AstraZeneca Research and Development Centre, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.7720.

IMPORTANCE: There is concern that long-acting muscarinic antagonists increase 
cardiovascular morbidity or mortality in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: To determine the cardiovascular safety (noninferiority) and efficacy 
(superiority) of aclidinium bromide, 400 μg twice daily, in patients with COPD 
and cardiovascular disease or risk factors.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, 
double-blind, parallel-design study conducted at 522 sites in North America. A 
total of 3630 patients with moderate to very severe COPD and either a history of 
cardiovascular disease or at least 2 atherothrombotic risk factors were 
randomized; follow-up occurred for up to 3 years until at least 122 major 
adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) occurred. The first patient was enrolled on 
October 16, 2013 and the last on August 22, 2016. The final patient completed 
follow-up on September 21, 2017.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to receive aclidinium (n = 1812) or 
placebo (n = 1818) by dry-powder inhaler, twice daily for up to 3 years.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary safety end point was time to first MACE 
over up to 3 years (hazard ratio [HR] 1-sided 97.5% CI noninferiority 
margin = 1.8). The primary efficacy end point was the annual COPD exacerbation 
rate during the first year of treatment. Secondary outcomes included an expanded 
MACE definition (time to first MACE or serious cardiovascular event of interest) 
and annual rate of exacerbations requiring hospitalization.
RESULTS: Among 3589 patients analyzed (mean age, 67.2 years; 58.7% male), 2537 
(70.7%) completed the study. Of these, 69 (3.9%) aclidinium and 76 (4.2%) 
placebo patients had a MACE (HR, 0.89; 1-sided 97.5% CI, 0-1.23); the expanded 
MACE definition included 168 (9.4%) aclidinium vs 160 (8.9%) placebo patients 
with events (HR, 1.03; 1-sided 97.5% CI, 0-1.28). Annual moderate to severe 
exacerbation rates (aclidinium, 0.44; placebo, 0.57; rate ratio, 0.78; 2-sided 
95% CI, 0.68-0.89; P < .001) and rate of exacerbations requiring hospitalization 
(aclidinium, 0.07; placebo, 0.10; rate ratio, 0.65; 2-sided 95% CI, 0.48-0.89; 
P = .006) decreased significantly with aclidinium vs placebo. The most common 
adverse events were pneumonia (aclidinium, 109 events [6.1%]; placebo, 105 
events [5.8%]), urinary tract infection (aclidinium, 93 events [5.2%]; placebo, 
89 events [5.0%]), and upper respiratory tract infection (aclidinium, 86 events 
[4.8%]; placebo, 101 events [5.6%]).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with COPD and increased cardiovascular 
risk, aclidinium was noninferior to placebo for risk of MACE over 3 years. The 
rate of moderate to severe COPD exacerbations was reduced over the first year.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01966107.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2019.4973
PMCID: PMC6506885
PMID: 31063575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Wise 
reported receipt of personal fees from AstraZeneca, Contrafect, Pulmonx, 
Novartis, Mylan, Theravance, Roche, Spiration, Sunovion, Merck, Circassia, 
Pneuma, Verona, Bonti, Denali, Aradigm, Regeneron, Kiniksa, Syneos, and 
Propeller Health; grants from Pearl Therapeutics; and grants and personal fees 
from AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Boehringer Ingelheim, and GlaxoSmithKline. Dr 
Chapman reported receipt of personal fees from Merck and the Canadian Institutes 
of Health Research–GlaxoSmithKline; grants from Baxter, GlaxoSmithKline, Amgen, 
and Shire; and grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
CSL Behring, Grifols, Sanofi, Genentech, Kamada, Roche, and Novartis. Dr Scirica 
reported receipt of personal fees from AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Biogen Idec, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Covance, Dr Reddy’s Laboratories, Eisai, Elsevier Practice 
Update Cardiology, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, and St Jude 
Medical; grants from AstraZeneca, Novartis, and Merck; and equity from Health at 
Scale Technologies. Dr Bhatt reported receipt of grants from Forest 
Laboratories/AstraZeneca, Amarin, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eisai, Ethicon, 
Medtronic, Sanofi-Aventis, The Medicines Company, Roche, Pfizer, Ischemix, 
Amgen, Lilly, Chiesi, Ironwood, Abbott, Regeneron, PhaseBio, Idorsia, and 
Synaptic; receipt of personal fees from Duke Clinical Research Institute, Mayo 
Clinic, Population Health Research Institute, Belvoir Publications, Slack 
Publications, WebMD, Elsevier, HMP Global, Harvard Clinical Research Institute 
(now Baim Institute for Clinical Research), Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology, Cleveland Clinic, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, TobeSoft, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bayer, Medtelligence/ReachMD, the American College of 
Cardiology, and the Society of Cardiovascular Patient Care; receipt of travel 
reimbursement from the American College of Cardiology, the Society of 
Cardiovascular Patient Care, and the American Heart Association; associate 
editorship for the American College of Cardiology; unfunded research 
collaboration for FlowCo, PLx Pharma, Takeda, Merck, Novo Nordisk, and Fractyl; 
advisory board membership for Medscape Cardiology, Regado Biosciences, and 
Cardax; board of directorship for Boston VA Research Institute; deputy 
editorship for Clinical Cardiology; chairing the VA Cardiovascular Assessment, 
Reporting and Tracking System (CART) program’s Research and Publications 
Committee; participating as site co-investigator for St Jude Medical (now 
Abbott), Biotronik, Boston Scientific, and Svelte; and provision of editorial 
support services for Boehringer Ingelheim and Novo Nordisk. Drs Daoud, 
Zetterstrand, and Garcia Gil are employees of AstraZeneca. Dr Reisner is an 
employee of Pearl Therapeutics, a member of the AstraZeneca Group.


275. COPD. 2019 Aug;16(3-4):227-233. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1638355. Epub 2019 
Jul 29.

Different Relationships between F(E)NO and COPD Characteristics in Smokers and 
Ex-Smokers.

Högman M(1), Thornadtsson A(1)(2), Bröms K(2)(3), Janson C(1), Lisspers K(3)(4), 
Ställberg B(3)(4), Hedenström H(5), Malinovschi A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Respiratory, Allergy and Sleep Research, 
Uppsala University , Uppsala , Sweden.
(2)Center for Research & Development, Uppsala University/Region Gävleborg , 
Gävle , Sweden.
(3)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Family Medicine and 
Preventive Medicine, Uppsala University , Uppsala , Sweden.
(4)Center for Clinical Research, Uppsala University, County Council Dalarna , 
Falun , Sweden.
(5)Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Physiology, Uppsala University , 
Uppsala , Sweden.

Exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) is a marker of type-2 inflammation in asthma and is 
used in its management. However, smokers and ex-smokers have lower FENO values, 
and the clinical use of FENO values in COPD patients is unclear. Therefore, we 
investigated if FENO had a relationship to different COPD characteristics in 
smoking and ex-smoking subjects. Patients with COPD (n = 533, 58% females) were 
investigated while in stable condition. Measurements of FENO50, blood cell 
counts, IgE sensitisation and lung function were performed. Medication 
reconciliation was used to establish medication usage. Smokers (n = 150) had 
lower FENO50 9 (8, 10) ppb (geometric mean, 95% confidence interval) than 
ex-smokers did (n = 383) 15 (14, 16) ppb, p < 0.001. FENO50 was not associated 
with blood eosinophil or neutrophil levels in smokers, but in ex-smokers 
significant associations were found (r = 0.23, p < 0.001) and (r = -0.18, 
p = 0.001), respectively. Lower FENO values were associated with lower FEV1% 
predicted in both smokers (r = 0.17, p = 0.040) and ex-smokers (r = 0.20, 
p < 0.001). Neither the smokers nor ex-smokers with reported asthma or IgE 
sensitisation were linked to an increase in FENO50. Ex-smokers treated with 
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) had lower FENO50 14 (13, 15) ppb than non-treated 
ex-smokers 17 (15, 19) ppb, p = 0.024. This was not found in smokers 
(p = 0.325). FENO is associated with eosinophil inflammation and the use of ICS 
in ex-smoking COPD subjects, but not in smoking subjects suggesting that the 
value of FENO as an inflammatory marker is more limited in smoking subjects. The 
association found between low FENO values and low lung function requires further 
investigation.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1638355
PMID: 31357875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Chest. 2019 Dec;156(6):1111-1119. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.06.035. Epub 2019 
Jul 25.

Diffusing Capacity of Carbon Monoxide in Assessment of COPD.

Balasubramanian A(1), MacIntyre NR(2), Henderson RJ(1), Jensen RL(3), Kinney 
G(4), Stringer WW(5), Hersh CP(6), Bowler RP(7), Casaburi R(5), Han MK(8), 
Porszasz J(5), Barr RG(9), Make BJ(7), Wise RA(1), McCormack MC(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Duke University, Durham, 
NC.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, UT.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, University of 
Colorado, Denver, CO.
(5)Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 
Torrance, CA.
(6)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA.
(7)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, National Jewish 
Health, Denver, CO.
(8)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.
(9)Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University, New York, NY.
(10)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD. Electronic address: mmccor16@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: Diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (Dlco) is 
inconsistently obtained in patients with COPD, and the added benefit of Dlco 
testing beyond that of more common tools is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to determine whether lower Dlco is 
associated with increased COPD morbidity independent of emphysema assessed via 
spirometry and CT imaging.
METHODS: Data for 1,806 participants with COPD from the Genetic Epidemiology of 
COPD (COPDGene) study 5-year visit were analyzed, including pulmonary function 
testing, quality of life, symptoms, exercise performance, and exacerbation 
rates. Dlco percent predicted was primarily analyzed as a continuous variable 
and additionally categorized into four groups: (1) Dlco and FEV1 > 
50% (reference); (2) only Dlco ≤ 50%; (3) only FEV1 ≤ 50%; and (4) both ≤ 
50% predicted. Outcomes were modeled by using multivariable linear and negative 
binomial regression, including emphysema and FEV1 percent predicted among other 
confounders.
RESULTS: In multivariable analyses, every 10% predicted decrease in Dlco was 
associated with symptoms and quality of life (COPD Assessment Test, 0.53 [P < 
.001]; St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire, 1.67 [P < .001]; Medical Outcomes 
Study Short Form 36 Physical Function, -0.89 [P < .001]), exercise performance 
(6-min walk distance, -45.35 feet; P < .001), and severe exacerbation rate (rate 
ratio, 1.14; P < .001). When categorized, severe impairment in Dlco alone, FEV1 
alone, or both Dlco and FEV1 were associated with significantly worse morbidity 
compared with the reference group (P < .05 for all outcomes).
CONCLUSIONS: Impairment in Dlco was associated with increased COPD symptoms, 
reduced exercise performance, and severe exacerbation risk even after accounting 
for spirometry and CT evidence of emphysema. These findings suggest that Dlco 
should be considered for inclusion in future multidimensional tools assessing 
COPD.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.06.035
PMCID: PMC7242635
PMID: 31352035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Turk J Med Sci. 2019 Jun 18;49(3):888-893. doi: 10.3906/sag-1809-6.

The relationship between serum levels of surfactant protein D in COPD 
exacerbation severity and mortality.

Günaydın FE(1), Günlüoğlu G(2), Kalkan N(2), Aktepe EN(2), Demirkol B(2), Altın 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Uludağ University, 
Bursa, Turkey
(2)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Health Sciences University Yedikule 
Hospital for Chest Disease and Thoracic Surgery, İstanbul, Turkey

BACKGROUND/AIM: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of 
morbidity and mortality. In COPD patients, various inflammatory markers such as 
cytokines and acute phase proteins, which show systemic inflammation in the 
circulation, increase during exacerbations. In our study, we aimed to determine 
the relationship between serum SP-D levels and exacerbation severity, clinical 
course of the disease, and early mortality after discharge.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty hospitalized patients with COPD acute exacerbation 
(46 male and 4 female) were recruited in this study. Thirty-three of the 
subjects (31 male and 2 female) were reevaluated after discharge. Venous blood 
samples were taken from all patients and followed up for exacerbation frequency, 
hospital admission, and mortality for 12 months.
RESULTS: Serum SP-D levels in the stable period of the patients were lower than 
exacerbation (P < 0.001). The median exacerbation period SP-D level of the 
patients admitted to emergency department in the first month was statistically 
significantly higher than that of the patients who were not admitted (P < 0.05) 
after discharge. There was a correlation between the rate of emergency admission 
and serum SP-D levels during the 12-month period after discharge (P = 0.04 (r = 
0.29)).
CONCLUSION: Our study showed that serum SP-D was found to be a useful biomarker 
in predicting emergency admission and predictor of the health status of COPD 
patients but did not predict early mortality after the exacerbation.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License.

DOI: 10.3906/sag-1809-6
PMCID: PMC7018249
PMID: 31083857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: none declared


278. Respir Res. 2019 Oct 30;20(1):241. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1187-7.

Maintained therapeutic effect of revefenacin over 52 weeks in moderate to very 
severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD).

Donohue JF(1), Kerwin E(2), Sethi S(3), Haumann B(4), Pendyala S(4), Dean L(4), 
Barnes CN(4), Moran EJ(4), Crater G(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Medicine, UNC School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, Medford, OR, USA.
(3)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., 901 Gateway Boulevard, South San Francisco, 
CA, 94080, USA.
(5)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., 901 Gateway Boulevard, South San Francisco, 
CA, 94080, USA. gcrater@theravance.com.

BACKGROUND: Revefenacin is a long-acting muscarinic antagonist that was recently 
approved for the nebulized treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Although shorter duration studies have documented the efficacy of 
revefenacin in COPD, longer-term efficacy has not been described. In a recent 
52-week safety trial, revefenacin was well tolerated and had a favorable 
benefit-risk profile. Here we report exploratory efficacy and health outcomes in 
patients receiving revefenacin 175 μg or 88 μg daily during the 52-week trial.
METHODS: In this randomized, parallel-group, 52-week trial (NCT02518139), 1055 
participants with moderate to very severe COPD received revefenacin 175 μg or 
88 μg in a double-blind manner, or open-label active control tiotropium.
RESULTS: Over the 52-week treatment period, both doses of revefenacin, as well 
as tiotropium, elicited significant (all p < 0.0003) improvements from baseline 
in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1). The trough FEV1 profile (least 
squares mean change from baseline) for revefenacin 175 μg ranged from 
52.3-124.3 mL and the trough FEV1 profile for tiotropium ranged from 
79.7-112.8 mL. In subgroup comparisons, the effect of revefenacin on trough FEV1 
was comparable in patients taking concomitant long-acting β-agonists, with or 
without inhaled corticosteroids, with patients who were not taking these 
medications. There were statistically significant (p < 0.05) improvements in all 
measured health status outcomes (evaluated using St. George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire, COPD Assessment Test, Clinical COPD Questionnaire and Baseline 
and Transition Dyspnea Index) from 3 months onward, in all treatment arms.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant sustained improvements from baseline in trough FEV1 and 
respiratory health outcomes were demonstrated for 175-μg revefenacin over 
52 weeks, further supporting its use as a once-daily bronchodilator for the 
nebulized treatment of patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02518139 ; Registered 5 August 2015.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1187-7
PMCID: PMC6822411
PMID: 31666076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.H., S.P., L.D., E.J.M. and G.C. are current 
employees of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. C.N.B was an employee of Theravance 
Biopharma US, Inc. at the time this study was conducted. J.F.D. is a consultant 
and advisory committee member for Mylan Inc., Theravance Biopharma, Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, and GSK. S.S. is a consultant and advisory 
committee member for Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., and received research 
support from Mylan Inc. E.K. has participated in consulting, advisory boards and 
speaker panels, or received travel reimbursement for Amphastar, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, Novartis, Oriel, Pearl, Sunovion, 
Teva and Theravance Biopharma. He has conducted multi-center clinical research 
trials for approximately 40 pharmaceutical companies.


279. Drug Res (Stuttg). 2019 Apr;69(4):211-217. doi: 10.1055/a-0665-4379. Epub 2018 
Sep 7.

A Single Institution Retrospective Study of the Clinical Efficacy of Tiotropium 
Respimat in Never-Smoking Elderly Asthmatics with Irreversible Airflow 
Limitation.

Hara J(1), Kasahara K(2), Ohkura N(1), Yamamura K(2), Sakai T(2), Abo M(1), 
Ogawa N(2), Saeki K(1), Koba H(3), Watanabe S(3), Uchida Y(1), Tambo Y(1), Sone 
T(4), Kimura H(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Kanazawa University Hospital, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 
Japan.
(2)Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Medical, 
Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 
Japan.
(3)Respiratory Medicine, Cellular Transplantation Biology, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(4)Regional Respiratory Symptomatology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of 
Medical Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: In Japan, most asthma deaths occur among the elderly. We should 
improve the control of asthma in elderly patients to reduce the number of deaths 
due to asthma. This retrospective study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of 
tiotropium RespimatⓇ (Tio-Res) in symptomatic, never-smoking, elderly asthmatics 
with irreversible airflow limitation despite the use of high-dose inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) plus long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonists (LABA).
METHODS: The Asthma Control Test™ (ACT), pulmonary function tests, morning and 
evening peak flow (mPEF, ePEF, respectively, evaluated with an ASSESS® peak flow 
meter), and respiratory impedance (assessed with MostGraph®) were measured 
before and after a minimum of one year of Tio-Res 5 µg/day administration. 
Sixteen symptomatic, never-smoking asthmatics, aged 75 or over with irreversible 
airflow limitation despite the use of high-dose ICS plus LABA, were analyzed.
RESULTS: All patients were female (mean age, 81.6 years). Tio-Res led to 
statistically significant improvements in the total ACT score (19.9 to 23.6), 
FVC and FEV1 (1.97 to 2.14 L and 1.13 to 1.23 L, respectively), and mPEF and 
ePEF (229.9 to 253.8 L/min and 259.8 to 277.4 L/min, respectively). Tio-Res also 
resulted in statistically significant improvements in respiratory resistance at 
5 Hz (R5), respiratory resistance at 20 Hz (R20), R5-R20, low-frequency reactant 
indices at 5 Hz (X5), resonant frequency (Fres) and low-frequency reactance area 
(ALX).
CONCLUSIONS: Our retrospective study suggests that Tio-Res improves symptoms, 
pulmonary function, and respiratory impedance in symptomatic asthmatics aged 75 
or over with irreversible airflow limitation despite the use of high-dose ICS 
plus LABA.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0665-4379
PMID: 30193393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest. The 
authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of this paper.


280. Int Immunopharmacol. 2019 Dec;77:105950. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2019.105950. Epub 
2019 Oct 17.

Inhaled corticosteroids and risk of pneumonia in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Yang M(1), Du Y(1), Chen H(1), Jiang D(2), Xu Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Diseases Laboratory, Chengdu Second People's Hospital, Chengdu, 
China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China. Electronic address: depengjiang@163.com.
(3)Respiratory Diseases Laboratory, Chengdu Second People's Hospital, Chengdu, 
China. Electronic address: eyyhxyjs@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are generally used to treat patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who suffer from repeated 
exacerbations. Recently, it was reported that ICS treatment increased the risk 
of pneumonia in COPD patients. But it is controversial.The objective of this 
paper is to clarify the associations between ICS treatment and the risk of 
pneumonia in COPD patients.
METHODS: PubMed, Cochrane Library, Clinical Trials.gov, and Embase were searched 
from February 2019 to June 2019. Randomized clinical trials (RCTs) were 
incorporatedthat compared ICS with non-ICS treatment on the risk of pneumonia in 
COPD patients. Meta-analyses were conducted by the Peto and Mantel-Haenszel 
approaches with corresponding 95% CIs.
RESULTS: Twenty-five trials (N = 49,982 subjects) were included. Pooled results 
demonstrated a significantly increased risk of pneumonia with ICS use in COPD 
patients (RR, 1.59, 95% CI, 1.33-1.90; I2 = 51%). ICS treatment also increased 
the risk of severe pneumonia (RR, 2.17, 95% CI, 1.47-3.22; I2 = 29%). The 
results of subgroup analysis based on doses of ICS were consistent with the 
above. However, subgroup analyses based on types of ICS revealed that 
fluticasone therapy was associated with an increased risk of pneumonia but not 
budesonide. In addition, medium- and low-doses of budesonide treatment also did 
not increase the risk of pneumonia.
CONCLUSIONS: Use of ICS increases the risk of pneumonia in patients with COPD. 
The above is prominent for fluticasone-containing ICSs but not for 
budesonide-containing ICSs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2019.105950
PMID: 31629940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Mar 28;14:741-755. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S194511. eCollection 2019.

Clinical burden of illness among patients with severe eosinophilic COPD.

Müllerová H(1), Meeraus WH(1), Galkin DV(2), Albers FC(2), Landis SH(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Epidemiology, GSK, Uxbridge, UK.
(2)Respiratory Medical Franchise, GSK, Uxbridge, NC, USA.
(3)Patient Centered Outcomes and Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, Collegeville, 
PA, USA.

Background: There are currently limited real-world data on the clinical burden 
of illness in patients with COPD who continue to exacerbate despite receiving 
triple therapy. The aim of this study was to compare the burden of COPD in 
patients with and without a phenotype characterized by a high blood eosinophil 
count and high risk of exacerbations while receiving triple therapy. Methods: 
This retrospective cohort study (GSK ID: 207323/PRJ2647) used UK Clinical 
Practice Research Datalink records linked with Hospital Episode Statistics. 
Eligible patients had a COPD medical diagnosis code recorded between January 1, 
2004 and December 31, 2014, and a blood eosinophil count recorded on/after that 
date. Patients were followed from index date (first qualifying blood eosinophil 
count) until December 31, 2015. The study phenotype was defined as ≥2 
moderate/≥1 severe acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) in the year prior to the 
index date, current use of multiple-inhaler triple therapy (MITT), and blood 
eosinophil count ≥150 cells/µL on the index date. Outcomes measured during 
follow-up included moderate/severe AECOPDs, severe AECOPDs, all-cause mortality, 
primary care (GP) clinical consultations, and non-AECOPD-related unscheduled 
hospitalizations. Results: Of 46,814 patients eligible for inclusion, 2512 
(5.4%) met the definition of the study phenotype. Adjusted rate ratios (95% CI) 
of moderate/severe AECOPDs and all-cause mortality in patients with the study 
phenotype versus those without were 2.32 (2.22, 2.43) and 1.26 (1.16, 1.37), 
respectively. For GP visits and non-AECOPD-related unscheduled hospitalizations, 
adjusted rate ratios (95% CI), in patients with the study phenotype versus those 
without, were 1.09 (1.05, 1.12) and 1.31 (1.18, 1.46), respectively. Conclusion: 
Patients with COPD and raised blood eosinophil counts who continue to exacerbate 
despite MITT represent a distinct subgroup who experience substantial clinical 
burden and account for high healthcare expenditure. There is a need for more 
effective management and therapeutic options for these patients.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S194511
PMCID: PMC6497493
PMID: 31114180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are employees of and hold 
stocks/shares in GSK. Dr Hana Müllerová reports non-financial support from GSK 
during the conduct of the study, was an employee of GSK, and owns shares and 
stock options of GSK. Dr Wilhelmine Meeraus reports non-financial support from 
GSK during the conduct of the study, is an employee of GSK. Dr Dmitry Galkin 
reports not-financial support from GSK during the conduct of the study, is an 
employee of GSK, owns GSK stock and shares and is a GSK employee. Dr Frank 
Albers reports non-financial support from GSK during the conduct of the study 
and is an emplyee of GSK. Dr Sarah Landis reports non-financial support from GSK 
during the conduct of the study.


282. J Asthma Allergy. 2019 Jan 25;12:43-58. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S189676. eCollection 
2019.

Real-world characteristics and disease burden of patients with asthma prior to 
treatment initiation with mepolizumab or omalizumab: a retrospective cohort 
database study.

Llanos JP(1), Bell CF(1), Packnett E(2), Thiel E(2), Irwin DE(2), Hahn B(1), 
Ortega H(3).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory, US Medical Affairs, GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA, 
Beth.a.hahn@gsk.com.
(2)Truven Health Analytics, An IBM Watson Health Company, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Respiratory, US Medical Affairs, GSK, La Jolla, CA, USA.

PURPOSE: Patients with severe asthma are eligible for asthma-specific biologics 
as add-on therapies, such as mepolizumab and omalizumab, when optimized 
controller therapies are unable to control their symptoms. However, few 
real-world data are available to describe the characteristics and associated 
economic burden of patients considered to be candidates for mepolizumab or 
omalizumab therapy.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study investigated patients with asthma (≥12 
years of age) identified at the time of first mepolizumab or omalizumab 
administration (index date) in the MarketScan™ Commercial Database. Data were 
collected during the 12-month period before the index date (baseline period) for 
two mutually exclusive patient groups (patients prescribed mepolizumab and 
omalizumab, respectively). Baseline demographics, history of exacerbations, 
healthcare resource utilization (HCRU), and medical costs were investigated.
RESULTS: In total, 413 and 1,834 patients who had been prescribed mepolizumab or 
omalizumab, respectively, were identified. During the baseline period, patients 
prescribed mepolizumab experienced more exacerbations (81.4% vs 57.5%, P<0.001), 
had higher asthma-related HCRU for outpatient services (all P<0.01), and had 
higher total asthma-related healthcare costs (US$11,000 vs US$7,400, P<0.001) 
compared with patients prescribed omalizumab. Allergic rhinitis, atopic 
dermatitis, and chronic idiopathic urticaria were more common among patients 
prescribed omalizumab vs mepolizumab. In contrast, sinusitis, nasal polyps, and 
comorbid COPD were more common among patients prescribed mepolizumab vs 
omalizumab. Prescriptions of fixed-dose inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) with 
long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) and ICS/LABA/long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
triple therapy during the baseline period were higher among patients prescribed 
mepolizumab vs omalizumab (80.4% vs 56.8% and 27.1% vs 14.4%, respectively, both 
P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: In the 12 months prior to initiation of asthma-specific biologics, 
patients prescribed mepolizumab had a different prevalence of certain 
comorbidities, higher disease burden, higher HCRU, and higher healthcare costs 
compared with patients prescribed omalizumab.

DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S189676
PMCID: PMC6354698
PMID: 30774390

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure J-PL, CFB, and BH are GSK employees 
and hold stock/shares. HO was an employee of GSK and holds stocks/shares in GSK 
during the conduct of this study and is now employed by Gossamer Bio. EP, ET, 
and DEI are Truven Health Analytics, An IBM Watson Health Company employees. The 
authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


283. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jun 24;14:1333-1342. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S207267. eCollection 2019.

Clinical features of three-dimensional computed tomography-based radiologic 
phenotypes of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Karayama M(1), Inui N(1)(2), Yasui H(1), Kono M(1), Hozumi H(1), Suzuki Y(1), 
Furuhashi K(1), Hashimoto D(1), Enomoto N(1), Fujisawa T(1), Nakamura Y(1), 
Watanabe H(2), Suda T(1).

Author information:
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Hamamatsu University 
School of Medicine, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.

PURPOSE: The diagnosis and severity of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) are defined by airflow limitation using spirometry. However, COPD has 
diverse clinical features, and several phenotypes based on non-spirometric data 
have been investigated. To identify novel phenotypes of COPD using radiologic 
data obtained by three-dimensional computed tomography (3D-CT).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The inner luminal area and wall thickness of third- to 
sixth-generation bronchi and the percentage of the low-attenuation area (less 
than -950 HU) of the lungs were measured using 3D-CT in patients with COPD. 
Using the radiologic data, hierarchical clustering was performed. Respiratory 
reactance and resistance were measured to evaluate functional differences among 
the clusters.
RESULTS: Four clusters were identified among 167 patients with COPD: Cluster I, 
mild emphysema with severe airway changes, severe airflow limitation, and high 
exacerbation risk; Cluster II, mild emphysema with moderate airway changes, mild 
airflow limitation, and mild dyspnea; Cluster III, severe emphysema with 
moderate airway changes, severe airflow limitation, and increased dyspnea; and 
Cluster IV, moderate emphysema with mild airway changes, mild airflow 
limitation, low exacerbation risk, and mild dyspnea. Cluster I had the highest 
respiratory resistance among the four clusters. Clusters I and III had higher 
respiratory reactance than Clusters II and IV.
CONCLUSIONS: The 3D-CT-based radiologic phenotypes were associated with the 
clinical features of COPD. Measurement of respiratory resistance and reactance 
may help to identify phenotypic differences.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S207267
PMCID: PMC6598936
PMID: 31296985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Hiroshi Watanabe reports grants from Japan 
Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED), and consulting and lectures 
fees from Nippon Shinyaku and Acterion. He also received lecture fees from Bayer 
and Pfizer, outside the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of 
interest in this work.


284. Clin Respir J. 2019 Nov;13(11):663-673. doi: 10.1111/crj.13073. Epub 2019 Sep 2.

Fixed-dose combination of umeclidinium and vilanterol for patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: A systematic review.

Ramadan WH(1), Al Masri S(2), Rizk J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy, Lebanese American 
University, Byblos, Lebanon.
(2)GlaxoSmith Kline, Beirut, Lebanon.
(3)Bellevue Medical Center, Mansourieh, Lebanon.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common respiratory disease 
that is predicted to be one of the leading causes of death worldwide. 
Pharmacologic treatment options of COPD are bronchodilators, using either 
long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs), or long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs), 
or a combination of two. Anoro Ellipta (umeclidinium + vilanterol) dry powder 
inhaler, a fixed-dose combination of LAMA and LABA, was Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approved in 2013 for COPD. The objective of this study is 
to evaluate the efficacy and safety of once daily umeclidinium/vilanterol 
(62.5 mcg/25 mcg) in COPD patients, focusing on pharmacodynamic and 
pharmacokinetic characteristics, efficacy and safety in clinical studies and 
cost. Literature search was done through PubMed (2004-2017) using the terms 
umeclidinium, vilanterol, COPD, LABA and LAMA. Recent and significant clinical 
trials about the monocomponents and their combination were identified, in 
addition to reviews, guidelines for COPD, data from manufacturer and FDA product 
labels. The search was limited to English language studies on human subjects. 
Clinical data published on the combination of umeclidinium/vilanterol in 
patients with COPD have shown greater improvements in lung function compared to 
monotherapies. However, further studies comparing umeclidinium/vilanterol FDC 
(ANORO) to other LABA/LAMA combinations are needed.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13073
PMID: 31389190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Thorac Dis. 2019 Apr;11(4):1100-1105. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2019.04.49.

Efficacy and safety profile of roflumilast in a real-world experience.

Cilli A(1), Bal H(1), Gunen H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, School of Medicine, Akdeniz University, 
Antalya, Turkey.
(2)Sureyyapasa Research and Training Center for Chest Diseases and Thoracic 
Surgery, Medical Sciences University, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Roflumilast is the only phosphodiesterase enzyme 4 inhibitor 
approved in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
patients with chronic cough and sputum and a history of exacerbations. 
Real-world studies about the use of roflumilast are limited. Our aim was to 
assess the efficacy, safety and tolerability of roflumilast in the treatment of 
stable COPD, in a real-world setting.
METHODS: From August 2014 to August 2017, medical records of all COPD patients 
who were prescribed roflumilast therapy in Akdeniz University Hospital were 
analyzed retrospectively. COPD patients were studied in terms of efficacy, 
safety, and drug discontinuation rate. Efficacy was evaluated as the effect of 
roflumilast on exacerbation and hospitalization rates of COPD compared to the 
pre-treatment period.
RESULTS: Eighty-three COPD patients treated with roflumilast were included (mean 
age 66.2±9.3 years, 88.0% male). All the patients were chronic bronchitis and 
frequent exacerbator clinical phenotype and were classified in the Global 
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease categories C (n=17; 20.5%) and D 
(n=66; 79.5%). Mean duration of roflumilast use was 18.9±10.4 months. There was 
a significant decrease in both COPD exacerbations (2.7 vs. 1.16; P<0.001) and 
hospitalizations (0.77 vs. 0.32; P<0.001) in roflumilast users compared to the 
pre-treatment period. Of the patients, 22 (26.5%) experienced adverse events 
(AE) during their treatment period. The most frequently reported AEs were weight 
loss (10.8%), loss of appetite (10.8%) and nausea (8.4%). Serious or 
life-threatening AEs were not detected. Sixteen (19.3%) patients discontinued 
roflumilast because of AEs.
CONCLUSIONS: Roflumilast reduced exacerbations and hospitalizations in our 
real-world population with severe COPD. AEs are common and frequently leading to 
discontinuation of roflumilast therapy.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.04.49
PMCID: PMC6531746
PMID: 31179051

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.


286. Ter Arkh. 2019 Mar 29;91(3):17-21. doi: 10.26442/00403660.2019.03.000059.

Clinical releveance of hemorrhagic component of endobronchial inflammation in 
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation.

Shteiner ML(1)(2), Zhestkov AV(2), Babanov SA(2), Biktagirov II(2), Protasov 
AD(2), Kulagina VV(3), Budash DS(2), Zоlоtov МО(2).

Author information:
(1)Samara City Hospital №4, Samara, Russia.
(2)Samara State Medical University of the Ministry of Health of the Russian 
Federation, Samara, Russia.
(3)Samara Medical University "Reaviz", Samara, Russia.

AIM: The study aimed at investigating the relationship between severe 
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and hemorrhagic component 
of endobronchial inflammation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinico-endoscopic characteristics of 118 patients 
presenting with severe infectious exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, bloody expectorations and endoscopically confirmed hemorrhagic 
component of endobronchial inflammation have been analyzed. All patients 
underwent a series (5-6) of bronchoscopic examinations accompanied by collection 
of bronchoalveolar lavage specimens to reveal the presence of acid-resistant 
mycobacteria and to determine the bacterial flora. The exclusion criteria were 
the concomitant pulmonary or extrapulmonary pathologic conditions which could 
lead to hemorrhagic endobronchial manifestations. The other direction of the 
study was to investigate a correlation between jugulation of the exacerbation 
and dynamics of such endobronchial symptoms as mucosal edema and hyperemia, 
quality of bronchial secretions and hemorrhagic component of endobronchial 
inflammation.
RESULTS: All patients were found to have diffuse endobronchitis of severity 
grade II (39.83%) or III (60.17%) by Lemoine. The neoplastic and tuberculosis 
genesis of the hemorrhagic component of endobronchial inflammation and its 
clinical equivalent, the bloody expectorations, had been ruled out. In 50.85% of 
cases the hemorrhagic component of endobronchial inflammation could not be 
accounted for by hemolytic properties of cultured microorganisms. The mucosal 
edema and hyperemia remained stable during jugulation of the exacerbation. 
Unlike the improvement of quality of bronchial secretions, faster reversal of 
the hemorrhagic component of endobronchial inflammation showed statistical 
significance.
CONCLUSION: The hemorrhagic component of endobronchial inflammation can 
represent a non-obligatory manifestation of severe exacerbation of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, and its relief is the earliest endobronchial sign 
of incipient remission from severe COPD exacerbation.

DOI: 10.26442/00403660.2019.03.000059
PMID: 31094453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2019;178(4):355-362. doi: 10.1159/000495761. Epub 2019 
Feb 13.

Beneficial Effect of Early Intervention with Garenoxacin for Bacterial 
Infection-Induced Acute Exacerbation of Bronchial Asthma and Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease.

Homma T(1), Kawahara T(2), Mikuni H(2), Uno T(2), Sato H(2), Fujiwara A(2), 
Uchida Y(2), Fukuda Y(2), Manabe R(2), Ida H(2), Kuwahara N(2), Kimura T(2), 
Hirai K(2), Miyata Y(2), Jinno M(2), Yamaguchi M(2), Kishino Y(2), Murata Y(2), 
Ohta S(2), Yamamoto M(2), Watanabe Y(2), Yamaguchi H(2), Kusumoto S(2), Suzuki 
S(2), Tanaka A(2), Yokoe T(2), Ohnishi T(2), Sagara H(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergology and Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 
oldham726@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Division of Allergology and Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma have similar 
clinical features and are both exacerbated by airway infection.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether garenoxacin mesylate hydrate (GRNX) added to the 
standard care for bacterial infection-induced acute exacerbation of asthma or 
COPD in adults has clinical benefits.
METHOD: This single-arm clinical trial was conducted from January 2015 to March 
2016. Adults with a history of asthma or COPD for more than 12 months were 
recruited within 48 h of presentation with fever and acute deterioration of 
asthma or COPD requiring additional intervention. Participants were administered 
400 mg GRNX daily for 7 days without additional systemic corticosteroids or 
other antibiotics. The primary outcome was efficacy of GRNX based on clinical 
symptoms and blood test results after 7 days of treatment. Secondary outcomes 
were: (1) comparison of the blood test results, radiograph findings, and 
bacterial culture surveillance before and after treatment; (2) effectiveness of 
GRNX after 3 days of administration; (3) analyzation of patient symptoms based 
on patient diary; and (4) continued effectiveness of GRNX on 14th day after the 
treatment (visit 3).
RESULTS: The study included 44 febrile patients (34 asthma and 10 COPD). 
Frequently isolated bacteria included Moraxella catarrhalis (n = 6) and 
Klebsiella pneumoniae (n = 4). On visit 2, 40 patients responded, and no severe 
adverse events were observed. All secondary outcomes showed favorable results.
CONCLUSION: GRNX effectively treated asthma and COPD patients with acute 
bacterial infection without severe adverse events. Further research with a 
larger study population is needed.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000495761
PMID: 30759444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2019 Mar;7(3):934-942. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2018.09.027. Epub 2018 Oct 5.

Does Changing Inhaler Device Impact Real-Life Asthma Outcomes? Clinical and 
Economic Evaluation.

Rhee CK(1), van Boven JFM(2), Yau Ming SW(3), Park HY(4), Kim DK(5), Park HS(6), 
Ling JZJ(3), Yoo KH(7), Price DB(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of General Practice and Elderly Care Medicine, Groningen Research 
Institute for Asthma and COPD, University Medical Center Groningen, University 
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands; Unit of PharmacoEpidemiology & 
PharmacoEconomics, Department of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Groningen, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute, Singapore.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, 
Sungkyun Kwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Seoul National University, 
SMG-SNU Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Allergy and Clinical Immunology Department, Ajou University Medical Center, 
Seoul, Korea.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Allergy, Department of Internal Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: khyou@kuh.ac.kr.
(8)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute, Singapore; Centre of Academic 
Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Inhaler usability and deposition differ between devices. Change of 
device may therefore have an impact on clinical and economic outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize clinical and economic asthma outcomes surrounding the 
change from a dry powder inhaler (DPI) to a pressurized metered-dose inhaler 
(pMDI) for fixed-dose combination inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β agonist 
(FDC ICS/LABA) treatment.
METHODS: Three retrospective cohort substudies using 2010 to 2015 data from the 
Korean Health Insurance and Review Assessment Service database were performed. 
Patients with asthma who received an FDC ICS/LABA pMDI for the first time after 
initially being on FDC ICS/LABA DPI were included. The following outcomes were 
assessed: (1) persistence of change to pMDI over 6 months, (2) clinical outcomes 
during the year after the change compared with the baseline year; and (3) 
noninferiority comparison of costs and effectiveness between patients changing 
to a pMDI and matched patients who continued their DPI.
RESULTS: Patients who change inhalers seem to represent a more severe 
subpopulation. Fifty-eight percent of patients (95% CI, 56-60) persisted with 
the change. After the change in therapy, an increased proportion of patients 
(58.3%) remained free from severe exacerbations compared with the year before 
(47.4%; P < .001). Patients who changed to pMDIs had significantly less severe 
exacerbations, acute respiratory events, and lower short-acting β agonist 
inhaler average daily dose, but higher average ICS daily dose (all P < .05), 
compared with matched patients remaining on a DPI. Total costs were similar 
between patients who changed to pMDI therapy compared with those remaining on a 
DPI.
CONCLUSION: Changing from a DPI to a pMDI for FDC ICS/LABA asthma treatment can 
be as effective and cost-effective as remaining on a DPI.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2018.09.027
PMID: 30292924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Ann Thorac Med. 2019 Jan-Mar;14(1):75-82. doi: 10.4103/atm.ATM_145_18.

Immunization status in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A multicenter 
study from Turkey.

Ozlu T(1), Bulbul Y(1), Aydin D(2), Tatar D(3), Kuyucu T(4), Erboy F(5), 
Koseoglu HI(6), Anar C(3), Sunnetcioglu A(7), Gulhan PY(8), Sahin U(9), Ekici 
A(10), Duru S(11), Ulasli SS(12), Kurtipek E(13), Gunay S(14); RIMPACT Study 
Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, School of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical 
University, Trabzon, Turkey.
(2)Chest Disease Clinic, Pulmonary Diseases Hospital, Balikesir, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Dr. Suat Seren Pulmonary Diseases and 
Thoracic Surgery Education and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Sureyyapasa Pulmonary Diseases and Thoracic 
Surgery Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Chest Diseases, School of Medicine, Bulent Ecevit University, 
Zonguldak, Turkey.
(6)Department of Chest Diseases, School of Medicine, Gaziosmanpasa University, 
Tokat, Turkey.
(7)Department of Chest Diseases, School of Medicine, Yuzuncu Yil University, 
Van, Turkey.
(8)Chest Disease Clinic, Tosya State Hospital, Kastamonu, Turkey.
(9)Department of Chest Diseases, School of Medicine, Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
University, Rize, Turkey.
(10)Department of Chest Diseases, School of Medicine, Kırıkkale University, 
Kırıkkale, Turkey.
(11)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Diskapi Yildirim Beyazid Education and 
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(12)Department of Chest Diseases, School of Medicine, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(13)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Konya Education and Research Hospital, 
Konya, Turkey.
(14)Chest Disease Clinic, Afyon State Hospital, Afyon, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to detect the prevalence and the factors 
associated with influenza and pneumococcal vaccination and outcomes of 
vaccination during 2013-2014 season in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) in Turkey.
METHODS: This was a multicenter retrospective cohort study performed in 53 
different centers in Turkey.
RESULTS: During the study period, 4968 patients were included. COPD was staged 
as GOLD 1-2-3-4 in 9.0%, 42.8%, 35.0%, and 13.2% of the patients, respectively. 
Influenza vaccination rate in the previous year was 37.9%; and pneumococcus 
vaccination rate, at least once during in a life time, was 13.3%. Patients with 
older age, higher level of education, more severe COPD, and comorbidities, 
ex-smokers, and patients residing in urban areas had higher rates of influenza 
vaccination. Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that advanced age, 
higher education levels, presence of comorbidities, higher COPD stages, and 
exacerbation rates were associated with both influenza and pneumococcal 
vaccination. The number of annual physician/outpatient visits and 
hospitalizations due to COPD exacerbation was 2.73 ± 2.85 and 0.92 ± 1.58 per 
year, respectively. Patients with older age, lower education levels, more severe 
COPD, comorbid diseases, and lower body mass index and patients who are male and 
are residing in rural areas and vaccinated for influenza had significantly 
higher rates of COPD exacerbation.
CONCLUSIONS: The rates of influenza and pneumococcal vaccination in COPD 
patients were quite low, and the number of annual physician/outpatient visits 
and hospitalizations due to COPD exacerbation was high in Turkey. Advanced age, 
higher education levels, comorbidities, and higher COPD stages were associated 
with both influenza and pneumococcal vaccination.

DOI: 10.4103/atm.ATM_145_18
PMCID: PMC6341858
PMID: 30745939

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


290. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 May 7;14:961-969. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S193311. eCollection 2019.

Sex-related differences in management of Swedish patients with a clinical 
diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Åberg J(1), Hasselgren M(1), Montgomery S(2)(3)(4), Lisspers K(5), Ställberg 
B(5), Janson C(6), Sundh J(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro 70185, Sweden.
(2)Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Örebro University, Örebro 70182, 
Sweden.
(3)Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College, London, UK.
(5)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Family Medicine and 
Preventive medicine, Uppsala University, Uppsala 75122, Sweden.
(6)Department of Medical Sciences, Respiratory, Allergy & Sleep Research, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala 75105, Sweden.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, School of Medical Sciences, Örebro 
University, Örebro 70185, Sweden.

Purpose: Women with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have more 
symptoms, more exacerbations, lower health status scores, and more comorbidity. 
However, it is unclear whether management of COPD differs by sex. The aim of the 
study was to investigate differences by sex in the care of patients with COPD. 
Patients and methods: The population included 1329 primary and secondary care 
patients with a doctor´s diagnosis of COPD in central Sweden. Data were obtained 
from patient questionnaires and included patient characteristics and data on 
achieved COPD care. Analyses included cross-tabulations, chi-squared test and 
multiple logistic regression using several measures in COPD management as 
dependent variables, female sex as independent variable, and with adjustment for 
age groups, previous exacerbations, COPD Assessment Test, level of dyspnea 
assessed by the modified Medical Research Council scale, comorbid conditions, 
self-rated moderate/severe disease, level of education and body mass index. 
Results: Women were more likely to receive triple therapy (OR 1.86 (95% CI 
1.38-2.51)), to have any maintenance treatment (OR 1.82 (95% CI 1.31-2.55)), to 
be on sick leave (OR 2.16 (95% CI 1.19-3.93)), to have received smoking 
cessation support (OR 1.80 (95% CI 1.18-2.75)) and to have had pneumococcal 
vaccination (OR 1.82 (95% CI 1.37-2.43)), all independently of age, severity of 
disease or other potential confounders. Conclusion: Management of COPD differs 
by sex, with women being more actively managed than men. It is unclear whether 
this is due to patient- or care-related factors.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S193311
PMCID: PMC6511243
PMID: 31123398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


291. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2020 Jan 14;100(2):110-115. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0376-2491.2020.02.006.

[Clinical effect of nutritional and psychological intervention combined with 
pulmonary rehabilitation exercise on patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhang JH(1), Zhang LQ, Yang YP, Li X, Zhang Y, Wang LY, Shi H, Jiang H, Guo W, 
Mu L, Zeng Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmanory and Critical Care Medicine, the Sixth Affiliated 
Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Yuxi 653100, China.

Objective: To explore the clinical effect of nutritional and psychological 
intervention combined with pulmonary rehabilitation exercise on patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Methods: A total of 260 patients 
with COPD admitted to the Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical 
University from October 2014 to October 2017 were included. They were divided 
into mild, moderate, severe and extremely severe groups according to forced 
expiratory volume in one second predicted (FEV(1)%prep) of pulmonary function. 
The patients were divided into control group and comprehensive management group 
according to the random number table method. The control group was given routine 
treatment including smoking quitting persuasion, vaccination, oxygen therapy and 
standardized medication. The comprehensive management group was given additional 
nutritional support, psychological intervention and pulmonary rehabilitation 
exercise. The data of the lung function indexes (FEV(1)%prep, FEV(1)/FVC, 
PaO(2), PaCO(2)), nutritional indexes [body mass index (BMI), albumin (ALB), 
nutrition risk screening (NRS)2002], anxiety and depression scores, 6-minute 
walking distance (6MWD), modified medical research council (mMRC) dyspnea scale, 
COPD assessment test (CAT), St. George's score, and frequency of acute 
exacerbations were compared between two groups after 12 months of treatment. 
Results: After 12 months' treatment, PaO(2) in the comprehensive management 
group was significantly higher than that in the control group [(51.1±7.2) vs 
(47.0±9.1) mmHg] (1 mmHg=0.133 kPa); Nutritional risk (NRS2002) decreased 
obviously [(1.1±1.1) vs (2.2±1.0)]; anxiety score [(4.1±2.2) vs (5.6±2.7)]; 
depression score [(4.1±2.0) vs (5.5±2.6)] and St. George's score [(36.8±20.8) vs 
(48.6±19.5)] decreased significantly (P<0.05). And the 6MWD was significantly 
farther [(368.4±72.0) vs (343.4±75.0) m] in management group. The frequency of 
acute exacerbations was significantly reduced in the mild, moderate and severe 
groups (P<0.05). But there was no significant difference in FEV(1)%prep, 
FEV(1)/FVC, PaCO(2), BMI, ALB, mMRC score and CAT score. Conclusion: Nutritional 
and psychological intervention combined with pulmonary rehabilitation exercise 
can reduce the nutritional risk and the frequency of acute exacerbations in 
patients with COPD, relieve anxiety and depression state and improve the quality 
of life.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨以营养补充和心理干预联合肺康复训练操为主的综合管理对慢性阻塞性肺疾病（简称慢阻肺）患者的疗效。 方法： 
选择昆明医科大学第六附属医院2014年10月至2017年10月就诊的260例慢阻肺稳定期患者，依据肺功能分轻、中、重、极重度，各组按随机数字表法再分成对照组和综合管理组。对照组予劝导戒烟、疫苗接种、氧疗、规范药物使用等常规治疗，综合管理组在此基础上增加营养补充、心理干预、肺康复训练操。12个月后对比分析两组患者的第1秒用力呼气容积（FEV(1)）占预计值的百分比（FEV(1)%预计值）、FEV(1)与用力肺活量（FVC）的比值（FEV(1)/FVC）、动脉血氧分压（PaO(2)）及二氧化碳分压（PaCO(2)）、体质指数（BMI）、血清白蛋白（ALB）水平、营养风险筛查（NRS2002）评分、上臂围、6 
min步行距离（6MWD）、改良版英国医学研究委员会呼吸困难量表（mMRC）评分、慢阻肺评估测试（CAT）评分、中文版医院焦虑抑郁量表（HADS）评分、圣乔治呼吸问卷（SGRQ）评分、急性加重次数等。 
结果： 综合管理组PaO(2)显著高于对照组[（51.1±7.2）比（47.0±9.1）mmHg]（1 mmHg=0.133 
kPa）；NRS2002评分[（1.1±1.1）比（2.2±1.0）分]、焦虑评分[（4.1±2.2）比（5.6±2.7）分]、抑郁评分[（4.1±2.0）比（5.5±2.6）分]、SGRQ总分[（36.8±20.8）比（48.6±19.5）分]均显著低于对照组；6MWD显著长于对照组[（368.4±72.0）比（343.4±75.0）m]（P<0.05）；轻、中、重度患者急性加重次数显著低于对照组（均P<0.05）；FEV(1)%预计值、FEV(1)/FVC、PaCO(2)、BMI、ALB、上臂围、mMRC及CAT评分差异无统计学意义。 
结论： 营养干预、心理干预联合肺康复训练操的综合肺康复管理措施可降低慢阻肺患者的营养风险，改善焦虑抑郁，提高生活质量，减少轻、中、重度患者急性加重次数。.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0376-2491.2020.02.006
PMID: 31937049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Aug 6;14:1769-1778. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S207023. eCollection 2019.

Eicosanoids metabolized through LOX distinguish asthma-COPD overlap from COPD by 
metabolomics study.

Cai C(#)(1)(2), Bian X(#)(3), Xue M(1), Liu X(1), Hu H(1), Wang J(4), Zheng 
SG(5), Sun B(1), Wu JL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Guangzhou Institute of 
Respiratory Health, State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National 
Clinical Research Center of Respiratory Disease, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen, 
People's Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Macau Institute 
for Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau University of Science and 
Technology, Taipa, Macao, People's Republic of China.
(4)Center for Tissue Engineering and Stem Cell Research, Guizhou Medical 
University, Guiyang, Guizhou, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Ohio State University College of Medicine 
and Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The prevalence of asthma is greater than 20% in 
patients previously diagnosed with COPD. Patients with asthma-COPD overlap (ACO) 
are at risk of rapid progression of disease and severe exacerbations. However, 
in some patients with ACO, a clear distinction from COPD is very difficult by 
using physiological testing techniques. This study aimed to apply a novel 
metabolomic approach to identify the metabolites in sera in order to distinguish 
ACO from COPD.
METHODS: In the study, blood samples were collected from patients with COPD, 
ACO, and healthy controls. Cholamine derivatization-ultrahigh performance liquid 
chromatography-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UHPLC-Q-TOF/MS) was 
used to investigate serum metabolites of eicosanoids.
RESULTS: A clear intergroup separation existed between the patients with ACO and 
those with COPD, while ACO tends to have higher serum metabolic levels of 
eicosanoids. A robust Orthogonal Projections to Latent Structures-Discriminant 
Analysis (OPLS-DA) model was found for discriminating between ACO and COPD (R2Y 
=0.81, Q2=0.79). In addition, there is a significant correlation between some 
metabolites and clinical indicators, such as hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids 
(HETEs), hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HPETEs) and FEV1/FVC. The higher 
values of area under the receiver operating characteristic curves (ROC) of 
HETEs, which were metabolized from HPETEs through lipoxygenase (LOX), indicated 
that they should be the potential biomarkers to distinguish ACO from COPD.
CONCLUSION: Eicosanoids can clearly discriminate different biochemical metabolic 
proﬁles between ACO and COPD. The results possibly provide a new perspective to 
identify potential biomarkers of ACO and may be helpful for personalized 
treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S207023
PMCID: PMC6689553
PMID: 31496676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


293. J Korean Med Sci. 2019 Jul 29;34(29):e195. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2019.34.e195.

Clinical Phenotypes, Comorbidities, and Exacerbations according to Serum 25-OH 
Vitamin D and Plasma Fibrinogen Levels in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Hyun DG(1), Oh YM(1), Lee SW(1), Lee SD(1), Lee JS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. jsdoc1186@daum.net.

Comment in
    J Korean Med Sci. 2019 Jul 29;34(29):

BACKGROUND: Although vitamin D deficiency is prevalent in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the influence of vitamin D deficiency on 
COPD has not been fully established. Moreover, the inflammation process is 
associated with vitamin D deficiency in the general population. Therefore, this 
study aimed to determine whether clinical phenotypes, comorbidities, and 
exacerbation rates are affected by the level of plasma fibrinogen, well studied 
by an inflammatory marker in COPD patients, and 25-hydroxy (25-OH) vitamin D.
METHODS: This retrospective study analyzed patients with COPD whose inflammatory 
marker levels, especially plasma fibrinogen and 25-OH vitamin D levels, had been 
examined. A correlation analysis was conducted for inflammatory markers and 
25-OH vitamin D. Clinical characteristics, comorbidities and exacerbation rates 
were compared among four groups based on plasma fibrinogen concentrations 
(threshold, 350 mg/dL) and 25-OH vitamin D levels (threshold, 20 ng/mL).
RESULTS: Among 611 patients with COPD, 236 were included in the study. The 
levels of inflammatory markers had no statistical correlation with the serum 
25-OH vitamin D levels. The four groups showed no statistically significant 
differences in age, sex, smoking history, inhaler use, and severity of 
comorbidities. Patients with high plasma fibrinogen concentrations and low 25-OH 
vitamin D levels had lower lung function, higher severity index, and higher 
annual rate of severe exacerbations 12 months before (0.23/year) and after 
(0.41/year) the measurement of 25-OH vitamin D levels than did the other 
patients.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggested an interaction between vitamin D deficiency 
and COPD. The measurement of plasma fibrinogen concentrations could help 
identify a severe phenotypic group among patients with vitamin D deficiency.

© 2019 The Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2019.34.e195
PMCID: PMC6660320
PMID: 31347309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.


294. Kardiologiia. 2019 Apr 13;59(3S):52-60. doi: 10.18087/cardio.2539.

[Predictors for development of major cardiovascular events in elderly patients 
with severe and extremely severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in 
combination with early stages of chronic kidney disease].

[Article in Russian]

Bolotova EV(1), Yavlyanskaya VV(1), Dudnikova AV(2).

Author information:
(1)Kuban State Medical University, Sedina st. 4, Krasnodar, Russia 350063.
(2)State Budgetary Institution of Health Care, Territorial Clinical Hospital #2, 
Krasnykh Partizan 6, k. 2, Krasnodar, Russia 350012.

AIM: To study the structure of major cardiovascular events (MCVE) and to 
identify their independent predictors in elderly patients with severe and 
extremely severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in combination 
with early stages of chronic kidney disease (CKD).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study included 172 elderly patients with stage 3-4 
COPD associated with stage 1-2 CKD. Initially, risk factors for MCVE were 
identified and levels of vitamin D (25 (ОН) D) were measured for all patients. 
In 12 months, MCVE anamnesis was collected, and patients were divided into two 
groups with and without MCVE during the observation period. The risk factors for 
MCVE, which were significantly different between the two groups according to 
results of a one-way analysis, were successively included into a logistic 
regression for identifying independent predictors of MCVE. A ROC analysis was 
performed for the identified variables to identify a predictive cut-off point.
RESULTS: 21 MCVEs were observed in 8.7% (15) patients. Heart rhythm disorders 
(HRD) not reversed at the prehospital stage were observed in 38.1% patients; 
acute cerebrovascular disease and transient ischemic attack - in 23.8%, acute 
coronary syndrome - in 23.8%, and pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) - in 14.3%. 
Two MCVEs, namely, a combination of HRD not reversed at the prehospital stage 
and PTE, were observed in 3 (20%) patients. The ROC analysis showed that the 
incidence of COPD exacerbation for the previous 12 months &gt;3 had the highest 
predictive value for the 12-month risk of MCVE in patients with COPD associated 
with early CKD (95% CI, 0.823-0.925, р=0.001). A total PROCAM score &lt;50 (95% 
CI, 0.882-0.964, р=0.001); GFR ≥80 ml/min/1.73 m2 (95% CI, 0.750-0.870, 
р=0.001); and a level of vitamin D ≥33 ng/ml (95% CI, 0.730-0.855, р=0.001) 
reduced the risk for MCVE.
CONCLUSIONS: In elderly patients with grade 3-4 COPD associated with stage 1-2 
CKD, the development of MCVE within 12 months was determined by the incidence of 
COPD exacerbations for the previous 12 months &gt;3 while a total PROCAM score 
&lt;50, GFR &gt;80 ml/min/1.73 m3 , and levels of vitamin D &gt;33 ng/ml reduced 
the risk of MCVE in these patients.

DOI: 10.18087/cardio.2539
PMID: 30990153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Crit Care. 2019 Apr 23;23(1):135. doi: 10.1186/s13054-019-2404-y.

Control of respiratory drive by extracorporeal CO(2) removal in acute 
exacerbation of COPD breathing on non-invasive NAVA.

Karagiannidis C(1), Strassmann S(2), Schwarz S(2), Merten M(2), Fan E(3)(4), 
Beck J(5)(6), Sinderby C(5)(7), Windisch W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pneumology and Critical Care Medicine, Cologne-Merheim 
Hospital, ARDS and ECMO Centre, Kliniken der Stadt Köln gGmbH, Witten/Herdecke 
University Hospital, Ostmerheimer Strasse 200, D-51109, Cologne, Germany. 
Christian.Karagiannidis@uni-wh.de.
(2)Department of Pneumology and Critical Care Medicine, Cologne-Merheim 
Hospital, ARDS and ECMO Centre, Kliniken der Stadt Köln gGmbH, Witten/Herdecke 
University Hospital, Ostmerheimer Strasse 200, D-51109, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Interdepartmental Division of Critical Care Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(4)Extracorporeal Life Support Program, Toronto General Hospital, Toronto, 
Canada.
(5)Keenan Research Centre for Biomedical Science and Department of Critical Care 
Medicine, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Comment in
    Crit Care. 2020 Jan 28;24(1):26.

BACKGROUND: Veno-venous extracorporeal CO2 removal (vv-ECCO2R) and non-invasive 
neurally adjusted ventilator assist (NIV-NAVA) are two promising techniques 
which may prevent complications related to prolonged invasive mechanical 
ventilation in patients with acute exacerbation of COPD.
METHODS: A physiological study of the electrical activity of the diaphragm (Edi) 
response was conducted with varying degrees of extracorporeal CO2 removal to 
control the respiratory drive in patients with severe acute exacerbation of COPD 
breathing on NIV-NAVA.
RESULTS: Twenty COPD patients (SAPS II 37 ± 5.6, age 57 ± 9 years) treated with 
vv-ECCO2R and supported by NIV-NAVA were studied during stepwise weaning of 
vv-ECCO2R. Based on dyspnea, tolerance, and blood gases, weaning from vv-ECCO2R 
was successful in 12 and failed in eight patients. Respiratory drive (measured 
via the Edi) increased to 19 ± 10 μV vs. 56 ± 20 μV in the successful and 
unsuccessful weaning groups, respectively, resulting in all patients keeping 
their CO2 and pH values stable. Edi was the best predictor for vv-ECCO2R weaning 
failure (ROC analysis AUC 0.95), whereas respiratory rate, rapid shallow 
breathing index, and tidal volume had lower predictive values. Eventually, 19 
patients were discharged home, while one patient died. Mortality at 90 days and 
180 days was 15 and 25%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates for the first time the usefulness of the 
Edi signal to monitor and guide patients with severe acute exacerbation of COPD 
on vv-ECCO2R and NIV-NAVA. The Edi during vv-ECCO2R weaning was found to be the 
best predictor of tolerance to removing vv-ECCO2R.

DOI: 10.1186/s13054-019-2404-y
PMCID: PMC6480839
PMID: 31014366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Approval for this study was gained from the Ethics Committee of the University 
of Witten/ Herdecke. Informed written consent was obtained from the patient. The 
study was registered retrospectively (German Clinical Trials Register/ DRKS 
00012737). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: The manuscript has been read and its 
submission approved by all co-authors. Patients were prospectively included 
after informed consent was obtained from the legal caregiver. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: C.K. received travel grants and lecture fees from Maquet, Rastatt, 
Germany; S.S. an M.M. have no conflicts of interest, St.St. received travel 
grants and lecture fees from Maquet Cardiopulmonary, Rastatt, Germany. W.W. 
received fees for advisory board meetings and lectures from Maquet 
Cardiopulmonary, Rastatt, Germany. E.F. received fees as a consultant for MC3 
Cardiopulmonary and ALung Technologies. Drs. Beck and Sinderby have made 
inventions related to neural control of mechanical ventilation that are 
patented. The patents are assigned to the academic institution(s) where 
inventions were made. The license for these patents belongs to Maquet Critical 
Care. Future commercial uses of this technology may provide financial benefit to 
Dr. Beck and Dr. Sinderby through royalties. Dr. Beck and Dr. Sinderby each own 
50% of Neurovent Research Inc. (NVR). NVR is a research and development company 
that builds the equipment and catheters for research studies. NVR has a 
consulting agreement with Maquet Critical Care. St-Michael’s Hospital has a 
research agreement with Maquet Critical Care AB (Solna, Sweden) and receives 
royalty and overhead from this agreement. C.K. and W.W. received an open 
research grant for the hospital from Maquet Cardiopulmonary, Rastatt, Germany. 
E.F. is supported by a New Investigator Award from the Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard 
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


296. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Oct 8;14:2291-2304. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S214836. eCollection 2019.

Benefits of different intensities of pulmonary rehabilitation for patients with 
moderate-to-severe COPD according to the GOLD stage: a prospective, multicenter, 
single-blinded, randomized, controlled trial.

He GX(#)(1)(2), Li N(#)(1)(3), Ren L(#)(2)(4), Shen HH(2), Liao N(5), Wen JJ(6), 
Xu YM(2), Wang J(4), Li QY(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Rehabilitation, The Fourth Rehabilitation Hospital 
of Shanghai (Shanghai Jingan Geriatric Hospital), Shanghai 200042, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Institute of Respiratory Disease, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai 200025, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Suzhou 
University, Jiangsu 215004, People's Republic of China.
(5)West-Nanjing Road Community Health-care Center of Shanghai, Shanghai 200040, 
People's Republic of China.
(6)Caojiadu Community Health Service of Shanghai, Shanghai 200042, People's 
Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) is essential to manage patients with 
COPD. The aim of this study was to investigate the appropriate intensity of PR 
exercise training for patients with moderate-to-severe COPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A prospective multicenter randomized controlled trial was 
conducted from January 2014 to October 2018. The subjects were randomly assigned 
to three groups with different intensities of PR, according to their maximum 
oxygen uptake percentage determined by cardiopulmonary exercise testing. After 
20 weeks of exercise training, the effects of low-, moderate-, and 
high-intensity exercise interventions on patients were compared to determine the 
most appropriate PR prescription.
RESULTS: For patients with moderate COPD, all the measured parameters were 
significantly improved in the moderate- and high-intensity PR groups (P<0.01), 
while there was no significant difference in the frequency of acute 
exacerbations and the mMRC questionnaire after 20 weeks of PR exercise in the 
low-intensity PR group. For patients with severe COPD, all variables were also 
improved in the high-intensity PR group (P<0.05), while the mean differences of 
pre- and post-PR were lower than those in patients with moderate COPD. Moreover, 
the Hamilton Anxiety Scale and body mass index showed no significant difference 
in low-intensity PR group (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: High-intensity PR exercise is helpful for patients with moderate to 
severe COPD. Moderate COPD patients need to receive intensive PR training; the 
improvement degrees from PR intervention were higher than those of the severe 
COPD patients. For patients with severe COPD, high-intensity PR exercise may be 
more beneficial if patients can tolerate it.

© 2019 He et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S214836
PMCID: PMC6790109
PMID: 31631999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest in this work.


297. Respirology. 2019 Dec;24(12):1183-1190. doi: 10.1111/resp.13620. Epub 2019 Jun 
21.

Increased risk of major adverse cardiac events following the onset of acute 
exacerbations of COPD.

Reilev M(1)(2), Pottegård A(1), Lykkegaard J(2), Søndergaard J(2), Ingebrigtsen 
TS(3), Hallas J(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Department of Public Health, University 
of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(2)The Research Unit of General Practice, Department of Public Health, 
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre and Amager Hospitals, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Comment in
    Respirology. 2019 Dec;24(12):1129-1130.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Acute exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) may trigger major adverse cardiac events (MACE). We aimed to 
determine whether the risk of having MACE was transiently increased following 
the onset of an acute COPD exacerbation.
METHODS: We conducted a nationwide, register-based study from 1997 to 2014 
comprising individuals with an acute COPD exacerbation followed by a MACE (acute 
myocardial infarction (MI), stroke or cardiovascular death). Using the 
case-crossover design, we estimated odds ratios (OR) for the association between 
acute exacerbations of COPD and MACE as well as for single outcomes (acute MI, 
stroke and cardiovascular death), different levels of severity of exacerbations 
and within patient subgroups.
RESULTS: We identified 118 807 cases with a MACE preceded by an exacerbation. 
Overall, the risk of MACE increased almost fourfold following the onset of an 
acute exacerbation compared to periods without exacerbations in the same 
individuals (OR: 3.70; 95% CI: 3.60-3.80). The associations were consistent for 
single outcomes (acute MI, OR: 3.57; cardiovascular death, OR: 4.33; and stroke, 
OR: 2.78) and particularly strong associations were demonstrated for severe 
exacerbations (OR: 5.92) and the oldest individuals (OR: 4.18).
CONCLUSION: The risk of MACE increased substantially following the onset of an 
acute exacerbation. This highlights that prevention of cardiac events is an 
important goal in the management of COPD. Attention should be paid to detecting 
cardiovascular disease following acute COPD exacerbations.

© 2019 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13620
PMID: 31222861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. COPD. 2019 Feb;16(1):1-7. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1575802. Epub 2019 Feb 21.

Practical Guide to the Identification and Diagnosis of Asthma-COPD Overlap 
(ACO).

Nuñez A(1), Sarasate M(1), Loeb E(1), Esquinas C(1), Miravitlles M(1)(2), 
Barrecheguren M(1).

Author information:
(1)a Pneumology Department , University Hospital Vall d'Hebron/Vall d'Hebron 
Research Institute (VHIR) , Barcelona , Spain.
(2)b CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES) , Barcelona , Spain.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the leading causes of 
mortality around the world. COPD is characterised by a heterogeneous clinical 
presentation and prognosis which may vary according to the clinical phenotype. 
One of the phenotypes of COPD most frequently studied is the asthma-COPD overlap 
(ACO), however, there are no universally accepted diagnostic criteria for ACO. 
It is recognised that the term ACO includes patients with clinical features of 
both asthma and COPD, such as more intense eosinophilic bronchial inflammation, 
more severe respiratory symptoms and more frequent exacerbations, but in 
contrast, it is associated with a better prognosis compared to COPD. More 
importantly, ACO patients show better response to inhaled corticosteroid 
treatment than other COPD phenotypes. The diagnosis of ACO can be difficult in 
clinical practice, and the identification of these patients can be a challenge 
for non-specialized physicians. We describe how to recognise and diagnose ACO 
based on a recently proposed Spanish algorithm and by the analysis of three 
clinical cases of patients with COPD. The diagnosis of ACO is based on the 
diagnosis of COPD (chronic airflow obstruction in an adult with significant 
smoking exposure), in addition to a current diagnosis of asthma and/or 
signficant eosinophilia.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1575802
PMID: 30789039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jul 4;14:1441-1453. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S195852. eCollection 2019.

Assessment of physical functioning and handling of tiotropium/olodaterol 
Respimat(®) in patients with COPD in a real-world clinical setting.

Steinmetz KO(1), Abenhardt B(2), Pabst S(3), Hänsel M(4), Kondla A(5), Bayer 
V(6), Buhl R(7).

Author information:
(1)LungCenter Darmstadt , Darmstadt, Germany.
(2)Pulmonary Practice , Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Lung Center , Bonn-Duisdorf, Germany.
(4)TA Respiratory/Biosimilars, Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, 
Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG , Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(6)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc ., Ridgefield, CT, USA.
(7)Pulmonary Department, Johannes Gutenberg University Hospital Mainz, Mainz, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) show 
signs of reduced physical activity from the early stages of the disease, 
impacting morbidity and mortality. Data suggest treatment with tiotropium, a 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist, and olodaterol, a long-acting ß2-agonist 
(LABA), as monotherapies and in combination, increases exercise capacity. This 
study assessed the effects of fixed-dose tiotropium/olodaterol (delivered via 
Respimat®) on physical function in Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease A-D patients requiring long-acting dual bronchodilation treatment 
in a real-world setting.
METHODS: This open-label, single arm, noninterventional study measured changes 
in physical function in COPD patients treated with tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg 
for approximately 6 weeks (between Visit 1 [baseline] and Visit 2). Primary end 
point was therapeutic success, defined as a minimum 10-point increase in 
Physical Functioning Questionnaire (PF-10) score. Secondary end points included 
change in PF-10 from Visit 1 to Visit 2, the patient's general condition 
(measured by Physician's Global Evaluation score) at Visit 1 and Visit 2, and 
patient satisfaction with treatment delivered via the Respimat® device (assessed 
by Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire) at study end.
RESULTS: Therapeutic success was observed in 51.5% of 1578 patients (95% 
confidence interval [CI] 49.0, 54.0) after approximately 6 weeks of treatment 
with tiotropium/olodaterol. Mean change in PF-10 score between Visit 1 and Visit 
2 was 11.6 points (95% CI 10.7, 12.6). Patient general condition improved as 
indicated by a general improvement in scores between visits. Most patients were 
very satisfied or satisfied with tiotropium/olodaterol treatment (82.5%), 
inhalation (87.5%), and handling of Respimat® (85.2%). One percent of patients 
reported an investigator-defined drug-related adverse events (AE).
CONCLUSION: Tiotropium/olodaterol treatment improved physical functioning in 
COPD patients. An associated increase in patient general condition was observed. 
Most patients were very satisfied or satisfied with tiotropium/olodaterol 
treatment, inhaling, and handling of the Respimat® device. No unexpected 
drug-related AE occurred.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S195852
PMCID: PMC6618035
PMID: 31308649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RB received grants and personal fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, and Roche. He also received 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Cipla and Teva, outside the submitted 
work. SP was an investigator in the submitted work. AK and VB are employees of 
Boehringer Ingelheim. MH was an employee of Boehringer Ingelheim at the time of 
the submitted work and is now an employee of CSL Behring GmbH. The authors 
report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


300. BMC Pulm Med. 2020 May 11;20(1):134. doi: 10.1186/s12890-020-1156-4.

Efficacy of revefenacin, a long-acting muscarinic antagonist for nebulized 
therapy, in patients with markers of more severe COPD: a post hoc subgroup 
analysis.

Donohue JF(1), Kerwin E(2), Barnes CN(3), Moran EJ(3), Haumann B(3), Crater 
GD(4).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Medicine, UNC School of Medicine, 321 S Columbia St, Chapel Hill, 
NC, 27516, USA.
(2)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, LLC, 3860 Crater Lake Ave, 
Medford, OR, 97504, USA.
(3)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., 901 Gateway Blvd, South San Francisco, CA, 
94080, USA.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., 901 Gateway Blvd, South San Francisco, CA, 
94080, USA. gcrater@theravance.com.

BACKGROUND: Revefenacin, a once-daily, long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
delivered via standard jet nebulizer, increased trough forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s (FEV1) in patients with moderate to very severe chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) in prior phase 3 trials. We evaluated the efficacy of 
revefenacin in patients with markers of more severe COPD.
METHODS: A post hoc subgroup analysis of two replicate, randomized, phase 3 
trials was conducted over 12 weeks. Endpoints included least squares change from 
baseline in trough FEV1, St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) 
responders, and transition dyspnea index (TDI) responders at Day 85. This 
analysis included patient subgroups at high risk for COPD exacerbations and 
compared patients who received revefenacin 175 μg and placebo: severe and very 
severe airflow limitation (percent predicted FEV1 30%-< 50% and < 30%), 2011 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) D, reversibility 
(≥ 12% and ≥ 200 mL increase in FEV1) to short-acting bronchodilators, 
concurrent use of long-acting β agonists and/or inhaled corticosteroids, older 
age (> 65 and > 75 years), and comorbidity risk factors.
RESULTS: Revefenacin demonstrated significant improvements in FEV1 versus 
placebo at Day 85 among the intention-to-treat (ITT) population and all 
subgroups. Additionally, there was a greater number of SGRQ and TDI responders 
in the ITT population and the majority of subgroups analyzed among patients who 
received revefenacin versus placebo. For the SGRQ responders, the odds of 
response (odds ratio > 2.0) were significantly greater in the revefenacin arm 
versus the placebo arm among the severe airflow obstruction, very severe airflow 
obstruction and 2011 GOLD D subgroups. For the TDI responders, the odds of 
response (odds ratio > 2.0) were significantly greater among the severe airflow 
obstruction subgroup and patients aged > 75 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Revefenacin showed significantly greater improvements in FEV1 
versus placebo in the ITT population and all subgroups. Furthermore, there were 
a greater number of SGRQ and TDI responders in the ITT population, and in the 
majority of patient subgroups among patients who received revefenacin versus 
placebo. Based on the data presented, revefenacin could be a therapeutic option 
among patients with markers of more severe COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical trials registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov 
(Studies 0126 [NCT02459080; prospectively registered 22 May 2015] and 0127 
[NCT02512510; prospectively registered 28 July 2015]).

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-020-1156-4
PMCID: PMC7216337
PMID: 32393215

Conflict of interest statement: JFD is a consultant and advisory committee 
member for Mylan Inc. and Sunovion Pharmaceuticals. EK has participated in 
consulting, advisory boards, speaker panels, or received travel reimbursement 
for Amphastar, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, 
Novartis, Oriel, Pearl, Sunovion, Teva and Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. He has 
conducted multicenter clinical research trials for approximately 40 
pharmaceutical companies. CNB was an employee of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc. 
at the time this study was conducted. EJM, BH, and GDC are current employees of 
Theravance Biopharma US, Inc.


301. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Apr 10;14:823-832. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S191946. eCollection 2019.

Inflammation and infections in unreported chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
exacerbations.

Calderazzo MA(1), Trujillo-Torralbo MB(1)(2), Finney LJ(1), Singanayagam A(1), 
Bakhsoliani E(1), Padmanaban V(2), Kebadze T(1), Aniscenko J(1), Elkin SL(1)(2), 
Johnston SL(1)(2), Mallia P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, UK.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, 
London, UK.

Purpose: COPD patients often do not report acute exacerbations to healthcare 
providers - unreported exacerbations. It is not known whether variances in 
symptoms, airway obstruction, aetiology and inflammatory responses account for 
differences in reporting of COPD exacerbations. The aims of the study were to 
compare symptoms, lung function changes, aetiology and inflammatory markers 
between exacerbations that were reported to healthcare providers or treated, 
with those that were unreported and untreated. Patients and methods: We 
recruited a cohort of COPD patients and collected clinical data and blood and 
airway samples when stable and during acute exacerbations. Virological and 
bacterial analyses were carried out and inflammatory markers measured. Results: 
We found no differences in symptoms, lung function, incidence of infection and 
inflammatory markers between reported and unreported exacerbations. Subjects who 
reported all exacerbations had higher BODE scores, lower FEV1 and more 
exacerbations compared with those who did not. Conclusion: The failure to report 
exacerbations is not related to the severity, aetiology or inflammatory profile 
of the exacerbation. Patients with less severe COPD and less frequent 
exacerbations are less likely to report exacerbations. The decision to report an 
exacerbation is not an objective marker of exacerbation severity and therefore 
studies that do not count unreported exacerbations will underestimate the 
frequency of clinically significant exacerbations. A better understanding of the 
factors that determine non-reporting of exacerbations is required to improve 
exacerbation reporting. Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: 
NCT01376830. Registered June 17, 2011.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S191946
PMCID: PMC6497477
PMID: 31114182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MAC was an employee of Chiesi when the 
manuscript was submitted. She was not an employee when the work was carried out 
and is no longer an employee of Chiesi. VP reports speaker fees from Chiesi and 
Pifzer, outside the submitted work. SLJ reports personal fees from Therapeutic 
Frontiers, Myelo Therapeutics Gbbh, Concert Pharmaceuticals, Bayer, Synairgen, 
Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, Sanofi Pasteur, Centocor, Aviragen, 
and resTORbio, outside the submitted work. In addition, SLJ has the following 
patents issued: GB 0405634.7; PCT/EP2003/007939; PCT/GB05/50031; 6779645.9; and 
13305152. PM reports speakers fees from Astra Zeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim, 
outside the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


302. Bioorg Med Chem. 2019 Aug 1;27(15):3339-3346. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2019.06.016. 
Epub 2019 Jun 8.

Chemical modification-mediated optimisation of bronchodilatory activity of 
mepenzolate, a muscarinic receptor antagonist with anti-inflammatory activity.

Yamashita Y(1), Tanaka KI(2), Yamakawa N(3), Asano T(4), Kanda Y(2), Takafuji 
A(2), Kawahara M(2), Takenaga M(4), Fukunishi Y(5), Mizushima T(6).

Author information:
(1)Technology Research Association for Next-Generation Natural Products 
Chemistry, 2-3-26 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Musashino University, 1-1-20 
Shinmachi, Nishi-Tokyo 202-8585, Japan.
(3)Shujitsu University School of Pharmacy, 1-6-1, Nishigawara, Naka-ku, Okayama 
703-8516, Japan.
(4)Institute of Medical Science, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, 
2-16-1, Sugao, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki 216-8512, Japan.
(5)Molecular Profiling Research Center for Drug Discovery (molprof), National 
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 2-3-26, Aomi, 
Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan.
(6)LTT Bio-Pharma Co., Ltd, Shiodome Building 3F, 1-2-20 Kaigan, Minato-ku, 
Tokyo 105-0022, Japan. Electronic address: t.mizushima@ltt.co.jp.

The treatment for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
usually involves a combination of anti-inflammatory and bronchodilatory drugs. 
We recently found that mepenzolate bromide (1) and its derivative, 
3-(2-hydroxy-2, 
2-diphenylacetoxy)-1-(3-phenoxypropyl)-1-azoniabicyclo[2.2.2]octane bromide (5), 
have both anti-inflammatory and bronchodilatory activities. We chemically 
modified 5 with a view to obtain derivatives with both anti-inflammatory and 
longer-lasting bronchodilatory activities. Among the synthesized compounds, 
(R)-(-)-12 
((R)-3-(2-hydroxy-2,2-diphenylacetoxy)-1-(3-phenylpropyl)-1-azoniabicyclo[2.2.2]octane 
bromide) showed the highest affinity in vitro for the human muscarinic M3 
receptor (hM3R). Compared to 1 and 5, (R)-(-)-12 exhibited longer-lasting 
bronchodilatory activity and equivalent anti-inflammatory effect in mice. The 
long-term intratracheal administration of (R)-(-)-12 suppressed porcine 
pancreatic elastase-induced pulmonary emphysema in mice, whereas the same 
procedure with a long-acting muscarinic antagonist used clinically (tiotropium 
bromide) did not. These results suggest that (R)-(-)-12 might be therapeutically 
beneficial for use with COPD patients given the improved effects seen against 
both inflammatory pulmonary emphysema and airflow limitation in this animal 
model.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2019.06.016
PMID: 31204225


303. BMC Pulm Med. 2019 Jul 18;19(1):131. doi: 10.1186/s12890-019-0892-9.

Predictors of outcome of noninvasive ventilation in severe COPD exacerbation.

Steriade AT(1)(2), Johari S(3)(4), Sargarovschi N(3), Necula D(3), Tudose 
CE(3)(4), Ionita D(3), Bogdan MA(4)(5), Bumbacea D(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pneumology & Acute Respiratory Care, "Elias" Emergency 
University Hospital, 17 Marasti Blvd, 011461, Bucharest, Romania. 
alex.steriade@gmail.com.
(2)"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 8 Eroii Sanitari Blvd, 
050474, Bucharest, Romania. alex.steriade@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pneumology & Acute Respiratory Care, "Elias" Emergency 
University Hospital, 17 Marasti Blvd, 011461, Bucharest, Romania.
(4)"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 8 Eroii Sanitari Blvd, 
050474, Bucharest, Romania.
(5)"Marius Nasta" Institute of Pneumology, 90 Viilor St., București, 050152, 
Bucharest, Romania.

BACKGROUND: Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) reduces the rate of endotracheal 
intubation (ETI) and overall mortality in severe acute exacerbation of COPD 
(AECOPD) with acute respiratory failure and is increasingly applied in 
respiratory intermediate care units. However, inadequate patient selection and 
incorrect management of NIV increase mortality. We aimed to identify factors 
that predict the outcome of NIV in AECOPD. Also, we looked for factors that 
influence ventilator settings and duration.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study was undertaken in a respiratory intermediate 
care unit in an academic medical center between 2016 and 2017. Age, BMI, lung 
function, arterial pH and pCO2 at admission (t0), at 1-2 h (t1) and 4-6 h (t2) 
after admission, creatinine clearance, echocardiographic data (that defined left 
heart dysfunction), mean inspiratory pressure during the first 72 h (mIPAP-72 h) 
and hours of NIV during the first 72 h (dNIV-72 h) were recorded. Main outcome 
was NIV failure (i.e., ETI or in-hospital death). Secondary outcomes were 
in-hospital mortality, length of stay (LOS), duration of NIV (days), mIPAP-72 h, 
and dNIV-72 h.
RESULTS: We included 89 patients (45 male, mean age 67.6 years) with AECOPD that 
required NIV. NIV failure was 12.4%, and in-hospital mortality was 11.2%. NIV 
failure was correlated with days of NIV, LOS, in-hospital mortality (p < 0.01), 
and kidney dysfunction (p < 0.05). In-hospital mortality was strongly associated 
with days of NIV (OR 1.27, 95%CI: 1.07-1.5, p < 0.01) and with FEV1 (p < 0.05). 
All other investigated parameters (including left heart dysfunction, dNIV-72 h, 
mIPAP-72 h, pH, etc.) did not influence NIV failure or mortality. dNIV-72 h and 
days of NIV were independent predictors of LOS (p < 0.01). Regarding the 
secondary outcomes, left heart dysfunction and pH at 1-2 h independently 
predicted NIV duration (dNIV-72 h, p < 0.01), while BMI and baseline pCO2 
predicted NIV settings (mIPAP-72 h, p < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: In-hospital mortality and NIV failure were not influenced by BMI, 
left heart dysfunction, age, nor by arterial blood gas values in the first 6 h 
of NIV. Patients with severe acidosis and left heart dysfunction required 
prolonged use of NIV. BMI and pCO2 levels influence the NIV settings in AECOPD 
regardless of lung function.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-019-0892-9
PMCID: PMC6639947
PMID: 31319839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial competing interests: DB has received 
speaker or advisory board fees from Chiesi, GSK, Linde and Novartis, 
institutional research funds (clinical trials) from Bayer, Chiesi, and Sanofi 
and in-kind equipment for the institution from Gongora and Linde. MAB has 
received speaker and advisory board fees from Chiesi, Pfizer, Novartis, 
Actelion, Boehringer Ingelheim. ATS has received speaker fees from Chiesi, 
Cipla, travel grants from Linde and VitalAire and in-kind equipment for the 
institution from Linde and Gongora. SJ, NS, DN, DI, CT declare no potential 
competing interests. The authors have not been financially rewarded for writing 
and have no competing interests directly related to this manuscript. The authors 
declare no non-financial competing interests.


304. Ter Arkh. 2019 Mar 11;91(1):78-83. doi: 10.26442/00403660.2019.01.000034.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients electronic register analysis: the 
effectiveness of patient's dynamic follow up and evaluation of treatment 
program.

Mishlanov VJ(1), Shubin IV(2), Bekker KN(1), Katkova AV(1), Koshurnikova EP(1).

Author information:
(1)Perm State Medical University of the Ministry of Health of the Russian 
Federation, Department of propaedeutics of internal diseases №1, Perm, Russia.
(2)Central clinical hospital of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.

AIM: The aim of the study. To estimate the effectiveness of clinical patients 
register implementation as well as to analyze different treatment and 
prophylactic programs on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients' 
structure.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The COPD patient's register consists of 4257 cases. 
Spirometrical data were evaluated. Dynamic follow was performed on 567 COPD 
patients. Bronchodilator's therapy was estimated as well as combined inhaled 
corticosteroid/ long acting β2-agonist medications and vaccination against 
pneumococcal infection.
RESULTS: Computer program "Electronic polyclinic" proposed by the authors of 
this article is effective in precision of diagnostic decision making in cohort 
study, dynamic follow up after clinical symptoms, evaluation of instrumental and 
laboratory results, prophylactics and treatment effectiveness, "clinical 
patients registers" automatic formation using syndrome or nosological principle, 
checking the COPD patients in the group of those with bronchial obstruction.
CONCLUSION: Positive effects of long-acting bronchodilator treatment on COPD 
exacerbation decreasing and more expressed effect of inhaled corticosteroid/ 
long acting β2-agonists were confirmed. More interesting result was influence of 
vaccination against pneumococcal infection PCV13 (polyvalent conjugated vaccine) 
on exacerbation frequency and dyspnea severity.

DOI: 10.26442/00403660.2019.01.000034
PMID: 31090376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Thorax. 2019 Oct;74(10):934-940. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2018-212340. Epub 2019 
Sep 3.

β(2)-Adrenergic genotypes and risk of severe exacerbations in COPD: a 
prospective cohort study.

Ingebrigtsen TS(1)(2)(3), Vestbo J(4)(5), Rode L(2)(6), Marott JL(2)(3), Lange 
P(1)(2)(3)(7), Nordestgaard BG(8)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hvidovre Hospital, Hvidovre and Amager 
Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(2)The Copenhagen General Population Study, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)The Copenhagen City Heart Study, Frederiksberg Hospital, Bispebjerg and 
Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, School of 
Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester University NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Section of Social Medicine, Institute of Public Health, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)The Copenhagen General Population Study, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 
Boerge.Nordestgaard@regionh.dk.

Comment in
    Thorax. 2019 Oct;74(10):927-928.

BACKGROUND: Individual susceptibility to exacerbations in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) is likely influenced by genetic factors; however, most 
such variance is unexplained. We hypothesised that β2-adrenergic receptor 
genotypes, Gly16Arg (rs1042713, c.46G>A) and Gln27Glu (rs1042714, c.79C>G) 
influence risk of severe exacerbations in COPD.
METHODS: Among 96 762 individuals in the Copenhagen General Population Study, we 
identified 5262 with COPD (forced expiratory volume in one second divided by 
forced vital capacity, FEV1/FVC, below 0.7, FEV1 less than 80% of predicted 
value, age above 40 years and no asthma) who had genotyping performed. Severe 
exacerbations were defined as acute admissions due to COPD during 5 years of 
follow-up (mean 3.4 years). 923 individuals with COPD diagnosed similarly in the 
Copenhagen City Heart Study (CCHS) were used for replication analyses.
RESULTS: We recorded 461 severe exacerbations in 5262 subjects. The HRs for 
severe exacerbations were 1.62 (95% CI 1.30 to 2.03, p=0.00002) for 16Gly/Arg 
heterozygotes and 1.41 (1.04 to 1.91, p=0.03) for 16Arg homozygotes, compared 
with 16Gly homozygotes. HRs were 1.35 (1.03 to 1.76, p=0.03) for 27Gln/Glu 
heterozygotes and 1.49 (1.12 to 1.98, p=0.006) for 27Gln homozygotes, compared 
with 27Glu homozygotes. Similar trends were observed in the CCHS. Among 27Gln 
homozygotes only, HRs were 5.20 (1.81 to 14.9, p=0.002) for 16Gly/Arg 
heterozygotes and 4.03 (1.40 to 11.6, p=0.01) for 16Arg homozygotes, compared 
with 16Gly homozygotes.
CONCLUSION: Common β2-adrenergic receptor genotypes influence risk of severe 
exacerbations in COPD, potentially mainly by genetic influence of the 16Arg 
allele in rs1042713.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2018-212340
PMID: 31481635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: TSI has received a fee for 
speaking from AstraZeneca. JV has received honoraria from Chiesi, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, and Novartis for 
consulting and for presenting at meetings and symposia, none of it related to 
the topic of this study. LR and JLM: none to declare. PL has received honoraria 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Novartis, Teva, and 
GlaxoSmithKline for presenting at meetings and symposia, none of it related to 
the topic of this study. BGN: none to declare.


306. Ann Pharmacother. 2019 Dec;53(12):1249-1258. doi: 10.1177/1060028019862322. Epub 
2019 Jul 4.

β-Blockers and the Rate of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Exacerbations.

Mersfelder TL(1), Shiltz DL(1).

Author information:
(1)Ferris State University College of Pharmacy, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.

Objective: To review the rate of exacerbations relative to β-blocker use in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Data Sources: A 
MEDLINE search (1953 to May 2019) was performed using the search terms 
beta-blockers, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and exacerbations. An 
EMBASE search was also performed using the search terms chronic obstructive lung 
disease and beta adrenergic receptor blocking agents (1970 to May 2019). 
References from the review of literature citations were also identified. Study 
Selection and Data Extraction: English-language studies assessing COPD 
exacerbations in patients prescribed a β-blocker were included. Any article not 
addressing exacerbations was excluded. Data Synthesis: A total of 15 articles 
were included; 7 articles showed no change, 1 provided mixed results, and 7 
indicated a significant decrease in COPD exacerbations in a variety of 
exacerbation severities. Two of the studies differentiated between 
cardioselective and noncardioselective β-blockers. Relevance to Patient Care and 
Clinical Practice: This work represents an initial assessment of the use of 
β-blockers to reduce COPD exacerbations. The findings raise the question if 
β-blockers should be used more frequently in patients with COPD. Conclusions: 
Based on the limited number of studies that address β-blocker use in COPD, it 
appears that exacerbations are not increased and may be decreased. A randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial is in progress to possibly provide more definitive 
answers to this question. Until the trial is complete, β-blockers should not be 
withheld in COPD patients who have concurrent cardiovascular conditions, 
especially where there is a mortality benefit.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028019862322
PMID: 31271049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2019 Jan;50(1):88-108.

[The Clinical Study of Comorbidities and Systemic Inflammation in COPD].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang YL(1), Min J(1), Li GH(2), Zheng YQ(2), Wu LH(3), Wang SJ(1), Qu B(4), Mao 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chengdu First People's Hospital, Chengdu 
610041, China.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Sichuan Combinational Hospital of Chinese 
and Western Medicine, Chengdu 610041, China.
(4)Department of Geriatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Chengdu University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) comorbidities and clinical characteristics, and to explore the 
inflammation mechanism.
METHODS: 220 stable COPD patients were included. Clinical characteristics and 
comorbidities were recorded, and blood samples were collected. The relationship 
among the number and type of comorbidities, Charlson comorbidity index (CCI), 
clinical characteristics and the levels of plasma inflammatory markers 
[interleukin (IL)-6, high sensitivity C-reaction protein (hs-CRP), tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), IL-8] were studied.
RESULTS: The top five comorbidities were hypertension, metabolic syndrome and 
diabetes osteoporosis, bronchiectasis and peripheral vascular diseases. The 
level of plasma IL-6 was greater in higher CCI score (≥4) group compared with 
lower CCI score (<4) group ( P=0.011). Levels of IL-6 and IL-8 and the number of 
hospitalization in prior year were positively correlated with CCI and age 
adjusted CCI (r<0.03, P<0.05). There was a correlation between the COPD 
comorbidities and systemic inflammatory response (r<0.3, P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Patients with a higher CCI score had more severe symptoms, 
functional impairment and higher level of inflammatory factors and high 
frequency of hospital admission due to acute exacerbation. The mechanism by 
which COPD may play a role in systemic inflammatory response deserves further 
study.

Copyright© by Editorial Board of Journal of Sichuan University (Medical Science 
Edition).

PMID: 31037911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Food Drug Anal. 2019 Jul;27(3):657-670. doi: 10.1016/j.jfda.2018.12.006. Epub 
2019 Jan 7.

Risk of adverse cardiovascular events with use of inhaled long-acting 
bronchodilators in management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Wang MT(1), Lai JH(2), Tsai CL(3), Liou JT(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. 
Electronic address: wmt@mail.ndmctsgh.edu.tw.
(2)School of Pharmacy, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. 
Electronic address: terry820426@gmail.com.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Tri-Service General Hospital, 
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
doc10376@ndmctsgh.edu.tw.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense 
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: ljtmail@gmail.com.

Inhaled long-acting bronchodilators, including long-acting β2 agonists (LABAs) 
and long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) are the mainstay therapy in the 
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a disease that poses 
a heavy burden on morbidity and mortality worldwide. Use of LABAs and LAMAs in 
patients with COPD, however, has been concerned about an increased risk of 
adverse cardiovascular events, despite inconsistent findings reported from 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies. In this review, 
we detailed the relevant evidence generated from RCTs and observational studies 
with respect to the risk of cardiovascular disease with use of LABAs and LAMAs 
in management of COPD, and analyzed the contradictory findings in the 
literature, as well as recommended future research directions to clear the air 
regarding the cardiovascular safety of inhaled long-acting bronchodilators.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Taiwan LLC.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfda.2018.12.006
PMID: 31324282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 4;14:181-194. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S179912. eCollection 2019.

Effects of baseline symptom burden on treatment response in COPD.

Martinez FJ(1), Abrahams RA(2)(3), Ferguson GT(4), Bjermer L(5), Grönke L(6), 
Voß F(7), Singh D(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical 
College, New York, NY, USA, fjm2003@med.cornell.edu.
(2)Morgantown Pulmonary Clinical Research, Morgantown, WV, USA.
(3)Department of Pulmonary & Critical Care, Mon Health Care, Morgantown, WV, 
USA.
(4)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(6)Biotechnology, CSL Behring, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(7)Biostatistics + Data Sciences Corp., Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. 
KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
(8)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

RATIONALE: In symptomatic patients with COPD, the decision whether to initiate 
maintenance treatment with a single agent or a combination of long-acting 
bronchodilators remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether baseline symptomatic status influences 
response to tiotropium/olodaterol treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Post hoc analysis of the randomized OTEMTO® studies 
(NCT01964352; NCT02006732), in which patients with moderate-to-severe COPD 
received placebo, tiotropium 5 µg, tiotropium/olodaterol 2.5/5 µg, or 
tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 µg once daily for 12 weeks via the Respimat® inhaler 
(Boehringer Ingelheim, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany). Impact of baseline 
symptomatic status (modified Medical Research Council [mMRC] score) on response 
to treatment with tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 µg, tiotropium 5 µg, or placebo at 
Week 12 was assessed by St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score 
and response rate, transition dyspnea index (TDI) focal score and response rate, 
and trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second response.
RESULTS: Tiotropium/olodaterol improved SGRQ total scores and response rates 
compared with placebo and tiotropium for patients with baseline mMRC scores 0-1 
and ≥2. For tiotropium/olodaterol vs tiotropium, greater improvements were 
observed for patients with mMRC ≥2 (SGRQ score adjusted mean treatment 
difference -3.44 [95% CI: -5.43, -1.46]; P=0.0007; SGRQ response rate ORs 2.09 
[95% CI: 1.41, 3.10]; P=0.0002). Dyspnea, measured by TDI score, was 
consistently improved with tiotropium/olodaterol vs placebo for patients with 
mMRC scores 0-1 and ≥2 (adjusted mean treatment difference 1.63 [95% CI: 1.06, 
2.20]; P<0.0001 and 1.60 [95% CI: 1.09, 2.10]; P<0.0001, respectively). In 
patients with mMRC scores 0-1 and ≥2, tiotropium/olodaterol consistently 
improved TDI response rate and lung function vs placebo and tiotropium.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with COPD with more severe baseline dyspnea appear to 
derive greater health status benefit with tiotropium/olodaterol compared with 
tiotropium alone.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S179912
PMCID: PMC6324615
PMID: 30655665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure FJM reports grants from NHLBI during 
the conduct of the study, grants from National Institutes of Health, personal 
fees from Continuing Education, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Nycomed/Takeda, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bellerophon Therapeutics 
(formerly Ikaria), Genentech, Novartis, Pearl, Roche, Sunovion, Theravance, CME 
Incite, Annenberg Center for Health Sciences at Eisenhower, Integritas, 
InThought, National Association for Continuing Education, Paradigm Medical 
Communications, LLC, PeerVoice, UpToDate, Haymarket Communications, Western 
Society of Allergy and Immunology, ProterixBio (formerly Bioscale), Unity 
Biotechnology, Concert Pharmaceuticals, Lucid, Methodist Hospital, Columbia 
University, Prime Healthcare Ltd, WebMD, PeerView Network, California Society of 
Allergy and Immunology, Chiesi, and Puerto Rico Thoracic Society, and advisory 
board participation for Janssen. RA reports grants and personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, and GlaxoSmithKline, and grants from Pearl 
Therapeutics. GTF reports consulting and advisory board fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Pearl Therapeutics, Novartis, Forest, Sunovion, and 
Verona, consulting fees from Receptos, speaker fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Pearl Therapeutics, Forest, and Sunovion, and 
research grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Pearl Therapeutics, 
Sunovion, Novartis, Theravance, Sanofi, Forest, and GlaxoSmithKline. LB reports 
advisory board participation or personal fees for lectures from ALK, Airsonett, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Glaxo SmithKline, Novartis, Takeda, 
and Teva. FV is an employee of Boehringer Ingelheim. LG was an employee at the 
time of the conduct of the study, and is currently employed by CSL Behring. DS 
reports personal fees from Apellis, Cipla, Genentech, Peptinnovate, and Vectura 
(formerly Skyepharma), and grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, Glenmark, Merck, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Pulmatrix, 
Teva, Theravance, and Verona. The authors report no other conflicts of interest 
in this work.


310. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jul 10;14:1503-1515. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S170848. eCollection 2019.

Status of and strategies for improving adherence to COPD treatment.

López-Campos JL(1)(2), Quintana Gallego E(1)(2), Carrasco Hernández L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Unidad Médico-Quirúrgica de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de 
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocío/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias 
(CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

Despite the wide application of adherence as a concept, the definition, 
evaluation and improvement of the adherence to treatment by patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) still present some challenges. 
First, it is necessary to clearly define the concepts of treatment adherence, 
compliance and persistence. Second, it is critical to consider the various 
methods of evaluating and quantifying adherence when interpreting adherence 
studies. In addition, the advantages and disadvantages of the different ways of 
measuring treatment adherence should be taken into account. Another subject of 
some debate is the number of variables associated with COPD treatment adherence. 
Adherence is a complex concept that goes beyond the dosage or the use of 
inhalation devices, and a number of variables are involved in determining 
adherence, from the clinical aspects of the disease to the patient's confidence 
in the doctor's expertise and the level of social support experienced by the 
patient. Notably, despite these challenges, the importance of adherence has been 
well established by clinical trials and routine clinical practice. The available 
evidence consistently shows the substantial impact that a lack of adherence has 
on the control of the disease and its long-term prognosis. For these reasons, 
the correct evaluation of therapeutic adherence should be a key objective in 
clinical interviews of patients. In recent years, various initiatives for 
improving adherence have been explored. All these initiatives have been based on 
patient education. Therefore, health care professionals should be aware of the 
issues pertaining to adherence and take the opportunity to educate patients each 
time they contact the health care system.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S170848
PMCID: PMC6628097
PMID: 31371936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JLLC has received honoraria for lecturing, 
providing scientific advice, participating in clinical studies or writing for 
publications during the last three years for (in alphabetical order): 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, CSL Behring, Esteve, Ferrer, Gebro, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Menarini, Novartis, Rovi, and Teva. The authors report 
no other conflicts of interest in this work.


311. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Dec 15;200(12):1477-1486. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201903-0624OC.

Safety and Adverse Events after Targeted Lung Denervation for Symptomatic 
Moderate to Severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (AIRFLOW). A 
Multicenter Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial.

Slebos DJ(1), Shah PL(2), Herth FJF(3)(4), Pison C(5), Schumann C(6), Hübner 
RH(7), Bonta PI(8), Kessler R(9), Gesierich W(10), Darwiche K(11), Lamprecht 
B(12), Perez T(13), Skowasch D(14), Deslee G(15), Marceau A(16), Sciurba FC(17), 
Gosens R(18), Hartman JE(1), Srikanthan K(2), Duller M(19), Valipour A(19); 
AIRFLOW-2 Study Group.

Collaborators: Valipour A, Abele C, Firlinger I, Kothakuzhakal K, Duller M, 
Lamprecht B, Kropfmueller R, Holzmann K, Rathmeier S, Hubner R, Erdmann L, 
Temmesfeld-Wollbrück B, Glösenkamp CR, Gesierich W, Reichenberger F, Niehaus C, 
Herth F, Eberhardt R, Gompelmann D, Rump B, Darwiche K, Eisenmann S, Kaiser U, 
Schwarz B, Sampel U, Schumann C, Kaiser R, Schumann-Stoiber K, Skowasch D, Ring 
S, Pison C, Briault A, Arbib F, Jondot M, Perez T, Fournier C, Matran R, Catto 
M, Bautin N, De Broucker V, Willemin M, Prevotat A, Wemeau L, Gicquello A, 
Foulon M, Camara H, Deslee G, Vallerand H, Dury S, Gras D, Bonnaire-Verdier M, 
Kessler R, Hirschi S, Porzio M, Degot T, Canuet M, Schuller A, Stauder J, 
Azouaou SA, Marceau A, Mal H, Costa Y, Shah PL, Garner J, Srikanthan K, Caneja 
C, Thornton J, Slebos DJ, Ten Hacken N, Hartman J, Klooster K, Augustijn S, 
Bonta P, Annema J, van de Pol M, Goorsenberg A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases and.
(2)Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Trust, Chelsea & Westminster Hospital and 
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Pneumology and Critical Care Medicine, Thoraxklinik, and.
(4)Translational Lung Research Center Heidelberg, University of Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)CHU Grenoble Alpes, Service Universitaire Pneumologie Physiologie, Université 
Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.
(6)Clinic of Pneumology, Thoracic Oncology, Sleep and Respiratory Critical Care, 
Klinikverbund Kempten-Oberallgäu, Kempten and Immenstadt, Germany.
(7)Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Medizinische Klinik m. Schw. 
Infektiologie und Pneumologie, Campus Virchow, Berlin, Germany.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)Service de Pneumologie, Nouvel Hôpital Civil, Université de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France.
(10)Asklepios-Fachkliniken Munich-Gauting, Comprehensive Pneumology Center 
Munich, Gauting, Germany.
(11)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Section of Interventional Pneumology, 
Ruhrlandklinik-University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, 
Germany.
(12)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Kepler Universitatsklinikum GmbH, Linz, 
Austria.
(13)CHU de Lille-Hôpital Calmette, Lille, France.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine II-Cardiology/Pneumology, University of 
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(15)CHU de Reims, Hôpital Maison Blanche, Service de Pneumologie, Reims, France.
(16)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Universitaire Bichat, Paris, France.
(17)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(18)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and.
(19)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 
Karl-Landsteiner-Institute for Lung Research and Pulmonary Oncology, Krankenhaus 
Nord-Klinik Floridsdorf, Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Dec 15;200(12):1455-1456.

Rationale: Targeted lung denervation (TLD) is a bronchoscopic radiofrequency 
ablation therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which durably 
disrupts parasympathetic pulmonary nerves to decrease airway resistance and 
mucus hypersecretion.Objectives: To determine the safety and impact of TLD on 
respiratory adverse events.Methods: We conducted a multicenter, randomized, sham 
bronchoscopy-controlled, double-blind trial in patients with symptomatic 
(modified Medical Research Council dyspnea scale score, ≥2; or COPD Assessment 
Test score, ≥10) COPD (FEV1, 30-60% predicted). The primary endpoint was the 
rate of respiratory adverse events between 3 and 6.5 months after randomization 
(defined as COPD exacerbation, tachypnea, wheezing, worsening bronchitis, 
worsening dyspnea, influenza, pneumonia, other respiratory infections, 
respiratory failure, or airway effects requiring therapeutic intervention). 
Blinding was maintained through 12.5 months.Measurements and Main Results: 
Eighty-two patients (50% female; mean ± SD: age, 63.7 ± 6.8 yr; FEV1, 
41.6 ± 7.3% predicted; modified Medical Research Council dyspnea scale score, 
2.2 ± 0.7; COPD Assessment Test score, 18.4 ± 6.1) were randomized 1:1. During 
the predefined 3- to 6.5-month window, patients in the TLD group experienced 
significantly fewer respiratory adverse events than those in the sham group (32% 
vs. 71%, P = 0.008; odds ratio, 0.19; 95% confidence interval, 0.0750-0.4923, 
P = 0.0006). Between 0 and 12.5 months, these findings were not different (83% 
vs. 90%; P = 0.52). The risk of COPD exacerbation requiring hospitalization in 
the 0- to 12.5-month window was significantly lower in the TLD group than in the 
sham group (hazard ratio, 0.35; 95% confidence interval, 0.13-0.99; P = 0.039). 
There was no statistical difference in the time to first moderate or severe COPD 
exacerbation, patient-reported symptoms, or other physiologic measures over the 
12.5 months of follow-up.Conclusions: Patients with symptomatic COPD treated 
with TLD combined with optimal pharmacotherapy had fewer study-defined 
respiratory adverse events, including hospitalizations for COPD 
exacerbation.Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov 
(NCT02058459).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201903-0624OC
PMCID: PMC6909835
PMID: 31404499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. JAAPA. 2019 Oct;32(10):44-45. doi: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000580568.79593.55.

What is the role of triple inhaled therapy in COPD?

Petite SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Sarah E. Petite is an assistant professor of pharmacy practice at the 
University of Toledo (Ohio) College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences. The 
author has disclosed no potential conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise.

Triple inhaled therapy for maintenance of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) consists of an inhaled corticosteroid, long-acting muscarinic antagonist, 
and long-acting beta2-agonist. Recent clinical studies evaluating triple therapy 
found a reduction in COPD exacerbations compared with other combination 
therapies. This article discusses the role of triple therapy in treating 
patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000580568.79593.55
PMID: 31567741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Bras Pneumol. 2019 Dec 13;45(6):e20180355. doi: 10.1590/1806-3713/e20180355. 
eCollection 2019.

Exploratory analysis of requests for authorization to dispense high-cost 
medication to COPD patients: the São Paulo "protocol".

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Carvalho-Pinto RM(1), Silva ITD(1)(2), Navacchia LYK(1), Granja FM(1)(2), 
Marques GG(1)(2), Nery TCDS(1), Fernandes FLA(1), Cukier A(1), Stelmach R(1).

Author information:
(1). Divisão de Pneumologia, Instituto do Coração - InCor - Hospital das 
Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP) 
Brasil.
(2). Disciplina de Saúde Coletiva, Faculdade de Medicina, Centro Universitário 
São Camilo, São Paulo (SP) Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: A resolution passed by the government of the Brazilian state of São 
Paulo established a protocol for requesting free COPD medications, including 
tiotropium bromide, creating regional authorization centers to evaluate and 
approve such requests, given the high cost of those medications. Our objective 
was to analyze the requests received by an authorization center that serves 
cities in the greater metropolitan area of (the city of) São Paulo between 2011 
and 2016.
METHODS: Data regarding the authorization, return, or rejection of the requests 
were compiled and analyzed in order to explain those outcomes. Subsequently, the 
clinical and functional data related to the patients were evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 7,762 requests for dispensing COPD medication were analyzed. 
Requests related to male patients predominated. Among the corresponding 
patients, the mean age was 66 years, 12% were smokers, 88% had frequent 
exacerbations, and 84% had severe/very severe dyspnea. The mean FEV1 was 37.2% 
of the predicted value. The total number of requests decreased by 24.5% from 
2012 to 2013 and was lowest in 2015. Most (65%) of the requests were accepted. 
The main reasons for the rejection/return of a request were a 
post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC ratio > 0.7, a post-bronchodilator FEV1 > 50% of 
the predicted value, and failure to provide information regarding previous use 
of a long-acting β2 agonist. During the study period, the total number of 
requests returned/rejected decreased slightly, and there was improvement in the 
quality of the data included on the forms.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we have identified the characteristics of the requests for 
COPD medications and of the corresponding patients per region served by the 
authorization center analyzed, thus contributing to the improvement of local 
public health care measures.

DOI: 10.1590/1806-3713/e20180355
PMID: 31851214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Respir Res. 2019 Oct 30;20(1):238. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1193-9.

Efficacy of umeclidinium/vilanterol versus umeclidinium and salmeterol 
monotherapies in symptomatic patients with COPD not receiving inhaled 
corticosteroids: the EMAX randomised trial.

Maltais F(1), Bjermer L(2), Kerwin EM(3), Jones PW(4), Watkins ML(5), Tombs 
L(6), Naya IP(4), Boucot IH(4), Lipson DA(7)(8), Compton C(4), Vahdati-Bolouri 
M(9), Vogelmeier CF(10).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Pneumologie, Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de 
pneumologie de Québec, Université Laval, Québec, Canada. 
Francois.Maltais@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(2)Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, OR, USA.
(4)Global Specialty & Primary Care, GSK, Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(5)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(6)Precise Approach Ltd, contingent worker on assignment at GSK, Stockley Park 
West, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(7)Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, Collegeville, PA, USA.
(8)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(9)Respiratory Discovery Medicine, Respiratory Research and Development, GSK, 
Stevenage, Hertfordshire, UK.
(10)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany, 
Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Prospective evidence is lacking regarding incremental benefits of 
long-acting dual- versus mono-bronchodilation in improving symptoms and 
preventing short-term disease worsening/treatment failure in low exacerbation 
risk patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) not receiving 
inhaled corticosteroids.
METHODS: The 24-week, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group Early 
MAXimisation of bronchodilation for improving COPD stability (EMAX) trial 
randomised patients at low exacerbation risk not receiving inhaled 
corticosteroids, to umeclidinium/vilanterol 62.5/25 μg once-daily, umeclidinium 
62.5 μg once-daily or salmeterol 50 μg twice-daily. The primary endpoint was 
trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) at Week 24. The study was also 
powered for the secondary endpoint of Transition Dyspnoea Index at Week 24. 
Other efficacy assessments included spirometry, symptoms, heath status and 
short-term disease worsening measured by the composite endpoint of clinically 
important deterioration using three definitions.
RESULTS: Change from baseline in trough FEV1 at Week 24 was 66 mL (95% 
confidence interval [CI]: 43, 89) and 141 mL (95% CI: 118, 164) greater with 
umeclidinium/vilanterol versus umeclidinium and salmeterol, respectively (both 
p < 0.001). Umeclidinium/vilanterol demonstrated consistent improvements in 
Transition Dyspnoea Index versus both monotherapies at Week 24 (vs umeclidinium: 
0.37 [95% CI: 0.06, 0.68], p = 0.018; vs salmeterol: 0.45 [95% CI: 0.15, 0.76], 
p = 0.004) and all other symptom measures at all time points. Regardless of the 
clinically important deterioration definition considered, 
umeclidinium/vilanterol significantly reduced the risk of a first clinically 
important deterioration compared with umeclidinium (by 16-25% [p < 0.01]) and 
salmeterol (by 26-41% [p < 0.001]). Safety profiles were similar between 
treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Umeclidinium/vilanterol consistently provides early and sustained 
improvements in lung function and symptoms and reduces the risk of 
deterioration/treatment failure versus umeclidinium or salmeterol in symptomatic 
patients with low exacerbation risk not receiving inhaled corticosteroids. These 
findings suggest a potential for early use of dual bronchodilators to help 
optimise therapy in this patient group.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1193-9
PMCID: PMC6821007
PMID: 31666084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IHB, DAL, CC, MV-B, and PWJ are employees of GSK 
and hold stocks and shares in GSK. IPN and MLW were employees of GSK at the time 
of the study. LT is a contingent worker on assignment at GSK. FM has received 
research grants for participating in multicentre trials for AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Sanofi, and Novartis, and has received unrestricted 
research grants and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Grifols, and 
Novartis. LB has received honoraria for giving a lecture or attending an 
advisory board for Airsonett, ALK-Abello, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GSK, Meda, Novartis and Teva. EMK has served on advisory boards, speaker 
panels or received travel reimbursement from for Amphastar, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Mylan, Novartis, Pearl, Sunovion, Teva, and 
Theravance and has received consulting fees from Cipia and GSK. CFV has received 
grants from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, Grifols, Novartis, 
Bayer-Schering, MSD, and Pfizer, and has received personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, CSL Behring, GSK, Grifols, 
Menarini, Mundipharma, Novartis, and Teva. ELLIPTA and DISKUS are owned 
by/licensed to the GSK group of companies.


315. Intern Med J. 2019 Oct;49(10):1307-1312. doi: 10.1111/imj.14259.

Cognitive function during exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Poot B(1)(2), Travers J(2), Weatherall M(3), McGinty M(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Nursing, Midwifery and Health, Victoria University of 
Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand.
(2)Respiratory Department, Hutt Valley District Health Board, Lower Hutt, New 
Zealand.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Wellington, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: The reported prevalence of cognitive impairment in patients with 
stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) ranges 36-77%. Few studies 
report the prevalence of cognitive impairment in acutely unwell COPD patients.
AIMS: To determine the prevalence and time course of cognitive impairment in 
patients with COPD during and after an admission to hospital with an 
exacerbation of the disease.
METHODS: Patients admitted to hospital with an exacerbation of COPD between 
October 2013 and November 2014 were administered the Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment tool, COPD assessment test and modified Borg dyspnoea scale at three 
points in time: within 24 h of admission, between 48 and 72 h after admission 
and 6 weeks post discharge.
RESULTS: Twenty-five patients agreed to participate. Four withdrew from the 
study after the initial evaluation. The mean (range) COPD assessment test score 
24 h after admission was 26 (18-37). Cognitive impairment was found in 19/25 
(76%) patients at the initial evaluation, 16/21 (76%) patients at the second 
evaluation. Overall, 22/25 (88%) showed cognitive impairment within 72 h of an 
exacerbation of COPD. Fourteen out of 21 (66%) patients showed cognitive 
impairment at the final evaluation. The mean Montreal Cognitive Assessment 
scores improved from admission (22.6) to the second evaluation (23.3) to the 
final evaluation 3 (24.4), but this change was not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: Cognitive impairment is highly prevalent during hospital admissions 
with an exacerbation of COPD. This impairment does improve with time, but only a 
minority recover within a normal range. This will affect patients' abilities to 
understand and remember information given to them in hospital and adhere to 
medication regimens.

© 2019 Royal Australasian College of Physicians.

DOI: 10.1111/imj.14259
PMID: 30779280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Mymensingh Med J. 2019 Apr;28(2):441-448.

Association of Serum Vitamin D (25OHD) Level with Acute Exacerbation of Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Islam S(1), Sarkar NK, Mujahid AA, Bennoor KS, Hossain SS, Attar MM, Jahan R, 
Hossain MA, Chowdhury HA, Ali L.

Author information:
(1)Dr Samprity Islam, Medical Officer, Department of Medicine, Bangabandhu 
Sheikh Mujib Medical University (BSMMU), Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Acute exacerbations of COPD is characterized by a change in the patients 
baseline dyspnoea, cough and/or sputum that is beyond normal day to day 
differences and guides to a change in standard medications in a patient with 
COPD. Vitamin D influences the innate & adaptive immune system, and exerts 
pleiotropic antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory responses. Vitamin D deficiency 
is frequent among COPD patients but its contributory role in disease 
exacerbations is widely debated. This study was aimed to assess relationship 
between reduced serum vitamin D (25-OHD) level with COPD severity and acute 
exacerbation. This observational cross-sectional study was carried out in the 
department of Respiratory Medicine, NIDCH, Mohakhali, Dhaka, Bangladesh from 
October 2016 to September 2017. Consecutive 80 hospital admitted patients with 
acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease diagnosed on the 
basis of clinical history & pulmonary function tests and 78 age & sex matched 
controls were investigated for serum vitamin D (25-OHD) level. Among the COPD 
patients, 37% had Vitamin D deficiency (<20ng/ml) and 28.75% had Vitamin D 
insufficiency (20-29ng/ml). Mean vitamin D (25-OHD) level of COPD patients 
(25.82±10.62ngm/ml) was found to be significantly lower than healthy controls 
(32.57±11.32ngm/ml). Vitamin D deficiency was found, by Pearson correlation 
test, to be significantly associated with severity of COPD. Multivariate 
analysis showed that age (in years), FEV1 (percent predicted), frequent 
exacerbators (≥2 in the last year), and smoking (>40 pack year) were 
significantly associated with Vitamin D deficiency. Acute exacerbation of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients was found to have vitamin D 
deficiency and vitamin D deficiency was significantly associated with severity 
of COPD. Vitamin D deficiency was also associated with frequent disease 
exacerbation.

PMID: 31086164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 May;98(20):e15646. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000015646.

The association between adherence and dementia in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Liao KM(1), Chen CY(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chi Mei Medical Center, Chiali.
(2)Master Program in Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung.
(4)Department of Medical Research, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Our previous studies have shown that patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) have an increased risk of dementia and that COPD combined with 
dementia confers an increased risk of acute respiratory dysfunction, severe 
sepsis, and hospital mortality. The aim of this study was to investigate whether 
medication adherence can decrease the risk of dementia in COPD.This 
retrospective study enrolled COPD patients from 1 million beneficiaries randomly 
sampled from all beneficiaries in Taiwan. We excluded COPD patients not 
prescribed a bronchodilator or those using theophylline or short-acting 
β2-agonists for <1 year. To ensure a sufficient observation period, we excluded 
patients diagnosed with dementia within 1 year after the diagnosis of COPD or 
those prescribed bronchodilators after the diagnosis of dementia. Patients with 
COPD and a history of severe mental disorders were also excluded.There was a 
total of 13,015 first diagnoses of COPD from 1998 to 2012, of whom 9,489 had a 
proportion of days covered (PDC) <80% and 1,206 had a PDC ≥80% before matching. 
In the high PDC group, 226 (18.74%) patients had acute exacerbations of COPD and 
were hospitalized within 1 year after diagnosis. Compared with the PDC <80% 
group, the PDC ≥80% group had a risk of dementia with an adjusted hazard ration 
of 0.88, but there were no statistically significant differences (95% confidence 
interval, 0.57-1.35).Medication adherence to bronchodilators may not modify the 
risk of dementia in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000015646
PMCID: PMC6531282
PMID: 31096487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 May 24;5(5):CD013024. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD013024.pub2.

Head-to-head oral prophylactic antibiotic therapy for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Threapleton CJ(1), Janjua S, Fortescue R, Baker EH.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology, St George's, University of London, London, UK.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD013024.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; including chronic 
bronchitis and emphysema) is a chronic respiratory condition characterised by 
shortness of breath, cough and recurrent exacerbations. Long-term antibiotic use 
may reduce both bacterial load and inflammation in the airways. Studies have 
shown a reduction of exacerbations with antibiotics in comparison to placebo in 
people with COPD, but there are concerns about antibiotic resistance and safety.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the safety and efficacy of different classes of 
antibiotics (continuous, intermittent or pulsed) for prophylaxis of 
exacerbations in patients with COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Trials Register and 
bibliographies of relevant studies. The latest literature search was conducted 
on 6 February 2019.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were selected that 
compared one prophylactic antibiotic with another in patients with COPD.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used the standard Cochrane methods. Two 
independent review authors selected trials for inclusion, extracted data and 
assessed risk of bias. Discrepancies were resolved by involving a third review 
author.
MAIN RESULTS: We included two RCTs, both published in 2015 involving a total of 
391 participants with treatment duration of 12 to 13 weeks. One RCT compared a 
quinolone (moxifloxacin pulsed, for 5 days every 4 weeks), with a tetracycline 
(doxycycline continuous) or a macrolide (azithromycin intermittent).The second 
RCT compared a tetracycline (doxycycline continuous) plus a macrolide 
(roxithromycin continuous), with roxithromycin (continuous) alone.The trials 
recruited participants with a mean age of 68 years, with moderate-severity COPD. 
Both trials included participants who had between two and five exacerbations in 
the previous one to two years. In one trial, 17% of patients had previously been 
using inhaled corticosteroids. In the other study, all patients were positive 
for Chlamydophila pneumoniae (C pneumoniae).Overall, we judged the evidence 
presented to be of very low-certainty, mainly due to imprecision, but we also 
had concerns about indirectness and methodological quality of the included 
studies. The primary outcome measures for this review included exacerbations, 
quality of life, drug resistance and serious adverse events.Macrolide + 
tetracycline versus macrolide There was no clear difference between treatments 
in improvement in quality of life as assessed by the Chronic Respiratory 
Questionnaire (CRQ). The CRQ scale ranges from 0 to 10 and higher scores on the 
scale indicate better quality of life. CRQ sub-scales for dyspnoea (mean 
difference (MD) 0.58, 95% confidence interval (CI) -0.84 to 2.00; 187 
participants; very low-certainty evidence), fatigue (MD 0.02, 95% CI -1.08 to 
1.12; 187 participants; very low-certainty evidence), emotional function (MD 
-0.37, 95% CI -1.74 to 1.00; 187 participants; very low-certainty evidence), or 
mastery (MD -0.79, 95% CI -1.86 to 0.28; 187 participants; very low-certainty 
evidence) at 12 weeks. For serious adverse events, it was uncertain if there was 
a difference between combined roxithromycin and doxycycline versus roxithromycin 
alone at 48 weeks follow-up after active treatment of 12 weeks (odds ratio (OR) 
1.00, 95% CI 0.52 to 1.93; 198 participants; very low-certainty evidence). There 
were five deaths reported in the combined treatment arm, versus three in the 
single treatment arm at 48 weeks follow-up after active treatment of 12 weeks 
(OR 1.63, 95% CI 0.38 to 7.02; 198 participants; very low-certainty 
evidence).Quinolone versus tetracycline There was no clear difference between 
moxifloxacin and doxycycline for the number of participants experiencing one or 
more exacerbations (OR 0.44, 95% CI 0.14 to 1.38; 50 participants, very 
low-certainty evidence) at 13 weeks. There were no serious adverse events or 
deaths reported in either treatment groups. We did not identify any evidence for 
our other primary outcomes.Quinolone versus macrolide There was no clear 
difference between moxifloxacin and azithromycin for the number of participants 
experiencing one or more exacerbations (OR 1.00, 95% CI 0.32 to 3.10; 50 
participants; very low-certainty evidence) at 13 weeks. There were no serious 
adverse events or deaths reported in either treatment groups. We did not 
identify any evidence for our other primary outcomes.Marcolide versus 
tetracycline There was no clear difference between azithromycin and doxycycline 
for the number of participants experiencing one or more exacerbations (OR 0.44, 
95% CI 0.14 to 1.38; 50 participants; very low-certainty evidence) at 13 weeks. 
There were no serious adverse events or deaths reported in either treatment 
groups. We did not identify any evidence for our other primary outcomes.We did 
not find head-to-head evidence for impact of antibiotics on drug resistance.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: It is not clear from the evidence included in this review 
whether there is a difference in efficacy or safety between different classes or 
regimens of prophylactic antibiotic, given for 12 to 13 weeks to people with 
COPD. Whilst no head-to-head comparisons of antibiotic resistance were 
identified, concerns about this continue. The sample size in this review is 
small and both included studies are of short duration. Thus, there is 
considerable uncertainty in effects observed and the effects of different 
prophylactic antibiotics requires further research.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD013024.pub2
PMCID: PMC6534184
PMID: 31125127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CT is employed part‐time by a NIHR Programme 
Grant to complete work on this review and is a clinical fellow in pharmacology. 
SJ is employed full‐time as a systematic reviewer by a NIHR Programme Grant to 
complete work on this review. RF is employed part‐time by a NIHR Programme Grant 
to complete work on this review and is a qualified general practitioner. EB is a 
consultant clinical pharmacologist.


319. Cureus. 2019 Apr 10;11(4):e4428. doi: 10.7759/cureus.4428.

The Role of Revefenacin in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Maqsood MH(1), Rubab K(1), Maqsood MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, King Edward Medical University / Mayo Hospital, Lahore, 
PAK.
(2)Community Medicine, Combined Military Hospital Lahore Medical College, 
Faisalabad, PAK.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic inflammatory lung 
disease characterized by progressive and persistent airflow limitation that is 
not fully reversible. Revefenacin is an investigational long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA), in late-stage development as a nebulized inhalation solution, 
which has been designed to produce long-acting bronchodilation, consistent with 
once-daily dosing, and with a high degree of lung-selectivity. It is more 
selective for muscarinic type 3 (M3) than muscarinic type 2 (M2) or muscarinic 
type 1 (M1) receptors. Its dissociation half-life for M3 is 82 minutes and 6.9 
minutes for M1, respectively. The bronchoprotective effect is seen as early as 
five-minute post-dose and is sustained for up to 24 hours. The estimated 24-hour 
potency (expressed as the concentration of dosing solution) is 45.0 
mg/ml. Once-daily dose of revefenacin provided long-term improvement in trough 
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1). It improved day 28 trough FEV1 
over placebo significantly (p < 0.001). M3: M2 receptor half-life is 12 compared 
to the other antagonists that have M3: M2 receptor half-life around 6.0. A 
24-hour serial spirometry, on day 84, showed that revefenacin 88 or 175 µg was 
associated with significant (p <0.01) improvements in trough FEV1 at all time 
points compared with placebo. Revefenacin is generally well-tolerated and unlike 
the other anti-muscarinics, it has no systemic anti-cholinergic adverse effects.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.4428
PMCID: PMC6559386
PMID: 31245215

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


320. Respir Med. 2019 Jul;153:68-75. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.05.017. Epub 2019 May 
29.

Healthcare costs of the SATisfaction and adherence to COPD treatment (SAT) study 
follow-up.

Corsico AG(1), Braido F(2), Contoli M(3), Di Marco F(4), Rogliani P(5), 
Scognamillo C(6), Olivi I(6), Santus P(7), Scichilone N(8), Lazzaro C(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Diseases, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation and 
Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy. Electronic address: corsico@unipv.it.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine (Di.M.I.), University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (DIBIC), University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(5)Respiratory Unit, Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University 
of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(6)Boehringer-Ingelheim, Milan, Italy.
(7)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(8)DIBIMIS, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(9)Studio di Economia Sanitaria, Milan, Italy.

Erratum in
    Respir Med. 2019 Jun 12;:

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterised by 
recurring exacerbations. We estimated the costs of healthcare resources for COPD 
management funded by the Italian National Healthcare Service (INHS) for one 
year.
METHODS: We examined the demographic, clinical, and economic variables at 
enrolment and follow-up visits (at 6 and 12 months) of COPD patients 
participating in the SAT study and referred to 20 Italian pulmonary centres with 
different institutional characteristics. Costs were expressed in Euro (€) 2018. 
A random effects log-linear panel regression model was performed to predict the 
average cost per patient.
RESULTS: Most of the centres were public institutions (90%; public university 
hospital: 30%). The total average cost of COPD was €2647.38/patient and 
ICS/LABA/LAMA therapy contributed the most (€1541.45). The average cost was 
€6206.19/patient for severe COPD (+139.67% vs the cost/patient with mild or 
moderate COPD). The regression model showed that, others things being equal, 
increases in the predicted average logged cost per patient were due to liquid 
oxygen therapy (+468.31%), three COPD exacerbations during the follow-up 
(+254.54%), and ICS/LABA or ICS/LABA/LAMA associated therapy (+59.26%). 
Moreover, a 1.19% increment was observed for each additional score of the CAT 
questionnaire. Conversely, a 36.52% reduction in the predicted average logged 
cost was reported for hospitals managed by local healthcare authorities.
CONCLUSIONS: The health econometric approach is innovative in the management of 
COPD patients in Italy. The results of the random effects log-linear panel data 
regression model may help clinicians estimate INHS costs when managing COPD 
patients. Clinicaltrials.gov ID# NCT02689492.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.05.017
PMID: 31174106


321. Chest. 2019 Oct;156(4):685-695. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.03.041. Epub 2019 May 
15.

The St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire Definition of Chronic Bronchitis May 
Be a Better Predictor of COPD Exacerbations Compared With the Classic 
Definition.

Kim V(1), Zhao H(2), Regan E(3), Han MK(4), Make BJ(3), Crapo JD(3), Jones 
PW(5), Curtis JL(6), Silverman EK(7), Criner GJ(2); COPDGene Investigators.

Collaborators: Crapo JD, Silverman EK, Make BJ, Regan EA, Beaty T, Begum F, 
Busch R, Castaldi PJ, Cho M, DeMeo DL, Boueiz AR, Foreman MG, Halper-Stromberg 
E, Hansel NN, Hardin ME, Hayden LP, Hersh CP, Hetmanski J, Hobbs BD, Hokanson 
JE, Laird N, Lange C, Lutz SM, McDonald ML, Parker MM, Qiao D, Regan EA, 
Santorico S, Silverman EK, Wan ES, Won S, Charbonnier JP, Coxson HO, Han MK, 
Hoffman EA, Humphries S, Jacobson FL, Judy PF, Kazerooni EA, Kluiber A, Lynch 
DA, Newell JD Jr, Regan EA, Ross JC, San Jose Estepar R, Sieren J, Stoel BC, 
Tschirren J, Van Beek E, van Ginneken B, van Rikxoort E, Washko G, Wilson CG, 
Jensen R, Everett D, Crooks J, Moore C, Strand M, Wilson CG, Hokanson JE, Hughes 
J, Kinney G, Lutz SM, Pratte K, Young KA, Curtis JL, Martinez CH, Pernicano PG, 
Hanania N, Alapat P, Atik M, Bandi V, Boriek A, Guntupalli K, Guy E, Nachiappan 
A, Parulekar A, DeMeo DL, Hersh C, Jacobson FL, Washko G, Barr RG, Austin J, 
D'Souza B, Pearson GDN, Rozenshtein A, Thomashow B, MacIntyre N Jr, McAdams HP, 
Washington L, McEvoy C, Tashjian J, Wise R, Brown R, Hansel NN, Horton K, 
Lambert A, Putcha N, Casaburi R, Adami A, Budoff M, Fischer H, Porszasz J, 
Rossiter H, Stringer W, Sharafkhaneh A, Lan C, Wendt C, Bell B, Foreman MG, 
Berkowitz E, Flenaugh EL, Westney G, Bowler R, Lynch DA, Rosiello R, Pace D, 
Criner G, Ciccolella D, Cordova F, Dass C, D'Alonzo G, Desai P, Jacobs M, Kelsen 
S, Kim V, Mamary AJ, Marchetti N, Satti A, Shenoy K, Steiner RM, Vega-Sanchez 
ME, Dransfield M, Bailey W, Bhatt S, Iyer A, Nath H, Oates G, Sonavane S, Wells 
JM, Ramsdell J, Friedman P, Soler X, Yen A, Comellas AP, Newell J Jr, Thompson 
B, Han MK, Kazerooni E, Martinez CH, Billings J, Begnaud A, Allen T, Sciurba F, 
Bon J, Chandra D, Fuhrman C, Weissfeld J, Anzueto A, Adams S, Maselli-Caceres D, 
Ruiz ME.

Author information:
(1)Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University, Philadelphia, PA. 
Electronic address: victor.kim@tuhs.temple.edu.
(2)Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.
(3)National Jewish Health, Denver, CO.
(4)University of Michigan Health Care System, Ann Arbor, MI.
(5)St. George's Hospital Medical School, London, UK.
(6)VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI.
(7)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA.

Comment in
    Chest. 2019 Oct;156(4):641-642.

BACKGROUND: Chronic bronchitis (CB) increases risk of COPD exacerbations. We 
have shown that the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) CB definition 
identifies patients with a similar clinical phenotype as classically defined CB. 
Whether the SGRQ CB definition is a predictor of future COPD exacerbations is 
unknown.
METHODS: We analyzed 7,557 smokers with normal spirometry and Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease stage 1-4 COPD in the Genetic Epidemiology 
of COPD study with longitudinal follow-up data on exacerbations. Subjects were 
divided into classic CB+ or classic CB-, using the classic definition. In 
addition, subjects were divided into SGRQ CB+ or SGRQ CB-. Exacerbation 
frequency and severe exacerbation frequency were determined in each group. 
Multivariable linear regressions were performed for exacerbation frequency with 
either classic CB or SGRQ CB and relevant covariates.
RESULTS: There were 1,434 classic CB+ subjects and 2,290 SGRQ CB+ subjects. The 
classic CB+ group had a greater exacerbation frequency compared with the classic 
CB- group (0.69 ± 1.26 vs 0.36 ± 0.90 exacerbations per patient per year; P < 
.0001) and a greater severe exacerbation frequency (0.26 ± 0.74 vs 0.13 ± 0.46 
severe exacerbations per patient per year; P < .0001). There were similar 
differences between the SGRQ CB+ and SGRQ CB- groups. In multivariable analysis, 
both SGRQ CB and classic CB were independent predictors of exacerbation 
frequency, but SGRQ CB had a higher regression coefficient. In addition, SGRQ CB 
was an independent predictor of severe exacerbation frequency whereas classic CB 
was not.
CONCLUSIONS: The SGRQ CB definition identified more subjects at risk for future 
exacerbations than the classic CB definition. SGRQ CB was at least a similar if 
not better predictor of future exacerbations than classic CB.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.03.041
PMCID: PMC6859248
PMID: 31047955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Med Sci Monit. 2019 Feb 12;25:1155-1163. doi: 10.12659/MSM.912033.

Comparative Efﬁcacy of Budesonide/Formoterol with Budesonide, Formoterol or 
Placebo for Stable Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Meta-Analysis.

Tang B(1)(2), Wang J(2), Luo LL(2), Li QG(2)(1), Huang D(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China (mainland).
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital, 
Nanchang, Jiangxi, China (mainland).
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND The 2018 Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
publication suggested that the combination of bronchodilator therapy of inhaled 
glucocorticoid/long-acting β₂ adrenoceptor agonist is more effective in 
improving pulmonary function and health status in the treatment of patients with 
acute exacerbations than the individual components; however, it is not known 
whether this also the case for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). The purpose of this meta-analysis was to evaluate the effectiveness of 
budesonide/formoterol in the maintenance and relief therapy of patients with 
stable COPD. MATERIAL AND METHODS An electronic search of the literature in 
MEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials was 
undertaken to identify published randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of ≥12 
weeks duration comparing the budesonide/formoterol, with budesonide, formoterol, 
or placebo in the treatment of patients with stable COPD. The identified RCTs 
were reviewed. The mean difference (MD) with corresponding 95% confidence 
interval (CI) was used to pool the results. RESULTS Seven high quality studies 
with RCTs met the inclusion criteria for meta-analysis. Compared with budesonide 
alone, the combination therapy of budesonide/formoterol showed significant 
improvement in the following spirometric indices: pre-dose forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV₁) (SMD: 0.26, 95% CI: 0.18, 0.34; P=0.000). In addition, 
versus formoterol alone, budesonide/formoterol was associated with a significant 
increase in pre-dose FEV₁ (SMD: 0.12, 95% CI: 0.07, 0.17; P=0.000). A similar 
pattern was also evident in the comparison to placebo, where 
budesonide/formoterol yielded greater increase in pre-dose FEV₁ (SMD: 0.24, 95% 
CI: 0.18, 0.30; P=0.000). Moreover, compared with other controls, the 
combination of budesonide-formoterol signiﬁcantly improved morning peak 
expiratory flow and evening peak expiratory flow, signiﬁcantly reduced the total 
score of St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire. CONCLUSIONS For stable COPD 
patients, compared with controls (monocomponents or placebo), 
budesonide/formoterol improved pulmonary function and health status. Future 
larger long-term RCTs are warranted to assess the beneficial clinical efficacy 
of budesonide/formoterol in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.912033
PMCID: PMC6380161
PMID: 30747109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None.


323. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2019 Sep 1;23(9):1035-1041. doi: 10.5588/ijtld.18.0630.

Association of plasma fibrinogen concentrations and blood eosinophil counts with 
clinical phenotypes of COPD.

Hyun DG(1), Lee JH(1), Oh YM(2), Lee SW(2), Lee SD(2), Lee JS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2019 Sep 1;23(9):963-964.

BACKGROUND: In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the 
plasma fibrinogen level is associated with a decline in lung function and 
exacerbation of COPD. High blood eosinophil count is also associated with 
exacerbation of COPD in some studies but not others.OBJECTIVE: To investigate 
the associations between clinical phenotypes and plasma fibrinogen levels and 
blood eosinophil counts in patients with COPD.METHODS: Outpatients with COPD, in 
whom plasma fibrinogen level and blood eosinophil count were measured at least 
once simultaneously, were analysed retrospectively. Patients were classified 
into four groups, based on plasma fibrinogen level (threshold, 350 mg/dl) and 
blood eosinophil percentage (threshold, 2%). Clinical characteristics, 
comorbidities, laboratory data, COPD severity and exacerbations were compared in 
the four groups.RESULTS: Of 370 patients with COPD, the group with both high 
fibrinogen levels and eosinophil counts had more severe airflow limitation, more 
comorbidities and higher COPD severity indexes than the groups with low plasma 
fibrinogen. The annual rates of severe (0.29/year) and total (0.42/year) 
exacerbations were significantly higher in patients with both high fibrinogen 
and eosinophils than in the other three groups.CONCLUSION: Plasma fibrinogen 
levels and blood eosinophil counts may predict the clinical phenotype and 
frequency of exacerbations of COPD.

DOI: 10.5588/ijtld.18.0630
PMID: 31615613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Res Social Adm Pharm. 2019 Jun;15(6):761-766. doi: 
10.1016/j.sapharm.2018.09.008. Epub 2018 Sep 19.

The delicate choice of optimal basic therapy for multimorbid older adults: A 
cross-sectional survey.

Sirois C(1), Lunghi C(2), Laroche ML(3), Maheux A(4), Frini A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Laval 
University, Quebec, Canada; Quebec Centre of Excellence on Aging, Quebec, 
Canada. Electronic address: caroline.sirois@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, University of Sherbrooke, Canada; Department 
of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, Italy. Electronic 
address: carolotta.lunghi@USherbrooke.ca.
(3)Service de Pharmacologie, Toxicologie et Pharmacovigilance, Centre Régional 
de Pharmacovigilance, de Pharmacoépidémiologie et d'information sur les 
médicaments, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Limoges, France; Faculty of 
Medicine, Limoges University, Limoges, France. Electronic address: 
Marie-Laure.Laroche@chu-limoges.fr.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy, Laval University, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: 
Alicia.Maheux.1@ulaval.ca.
(5)Department of Management, UQAR, Lévis, Canada. Electronic address: 
Anissa_Frini@uqar.ca.

BACKGROUND: Clinical practice guidelines are useful to suggest pharmacological 
therapies for the treatment of single chronic diseases. However, there is little 
guidance for multimorbidity, and specific quality measures for people with 
multimorbidity that can be used at a population level are lacking.
OBJECTIVE: To describe what pharmacists and geriatricians consider to be an 
optimal basic pharmacological therapy for an older individual with type 2 
diabetes (DM), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and heart failure 
(HF).
METHODS: An online cross-sectional survey among 162 pharmacists and 
geriatricians, in Quebec, Canada, was performed. Participants were invited to 
choose, from a list of 32 medications or classes, the optimal basic therapy for 
an individual aged 65-75 years with the 3 chronic diseases. Descriptive 
statistics were used to calculate the median number of medications chosen and 
the proportions of participants who chose each medication, according to the 
participant's specialty. A Kruskall-Wallis test was performed to detect whether 
there were differences in the median number of medications recommended according 
to speciality.
RESULTS: There was little consensus on the optimal basic pharmacological therapy 
for this hypothetical multimorbid individual, with 157 different combinations 
provided by the 162 participants. Nevertheless, 5 classes were chosen by at 
least 75% of the participants: metformin, long-acting anticholinergic agents, 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers 
(ARBs), beta-blockers, and short-acting beta-agonists. The median number of 
recommended medications was 10 (interquartile range [IQR]: 6-13). There was a 
statistically significant difference between specialties (p = 0.0396). 
Geriatricians recommended the lower median number of medications, 7 (IQR: 5-10).
CONCLUSIONS: At least half of the participants considered polypharmacy (≥10 
medications) inevitable for an optimal basic treatment of DM, COPD and HF. The 
heterogeneity of responses raises issues when considering quality indicators in 
population-based studies.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sapharm.2018.09.008
PMID: 30249377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Biol Pharm Bull. 2019 Nov 1;42(11):1861-1866. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b19-00385. Epub 
2019 Sep 3.

Comparison of the Association between Circulating Vitamin D(3) Levels and 
Clinical Outcomes in Patients with Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease: A Prospective Observational Study.

Hirai K(1)(2), Shirai T(3), Suzuki Y(1), Shimomura T(1), Itoh K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology & Genetics, School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Shizuoka.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacogenomics, Shizuoka General Hospital.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shizuoka General Hospital.

Vitamin D has an immune-modulating effect, related to the pathophysiology of 
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, few studies 
have focused on the difference between patients with asthma and COPD in the 
association of circulating vitamin D levels with clinical outcomes. We sought to 
investigate the associations of circulating vitamin D levels with health-related 
QOL (HR-QOL), severity, and exacerbations. Subjects included 152 asthma patients 
and 50 COPD patients. We measured plasma concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 
[25(OH)D3]. HR-QOL was assessed using the EuroQoL 5-Dimension (EQ-5D) and the 
12-item Short Form Health Survey (SF-12) scales. Exacerbations were recorded 
during a one-year follow-up. Associations between plasma 25 (OH)D3 
concentrations and outcome variables were evaluated using linear regression. 
Plasma concentrations of 25(OH)D3 were positively associated with the EQ-5D 
index value and the SF-12 physical component score in patients with asthma; 
however, such associations were not observed in patients with COPD. A 
significant association between severity and plasma concentrations of 25(OH)D3 
was found only in patients with COPD. The hazard ratios (95% confidence 
interval) of plasma 25(OH)D3 concentrations (per 1 ng/mL decrease) for time to 
first exacerbation was 1.38 (1.10-1.75; p = 0.006) and 0.95 (0.87-1.03; 
p = 0.179) in patients with COPD and asthma, respectively. Lower concentrations 
of plasma 25(OH)D3 contributed to lower HR-QOL in patients with asthma, and were 
associated with severity and risk of future exacerbations in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.b19-00385
PMID: 31484846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 20;14:2135-2144. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S203715. eCollection 2019.

Impact of symptom variability on clinical outcomes in COPD: analysis of a 
longitudinal cohort.

Kim MA(1), Suh MK(1), Park J(1), Kim JH(1), Kim TH(1), Kim EK(1), Oh YM(2), Lee 
SD(2), Lee JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, CHA Bundang 
Medical Center, CHA University, Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: We compared clinical characteristics of COPD patients according to 
symptom variability and evaluated the effect of symptom variability during the 
first year of enrollment on clinical outcomes of COPD.
METHODS: We analyzed COPD patients' data from the Korean Obstructive Lung 
Disease (KOLD) cohort. Symptom variability was defined based on the value of 
standard deviation (SD) of mMRC scores obtained every 3 months during the 
follow-up period of the first year. Patients were divided into 2 groups: the 
consistent (SD of mMRC scores =0) and variable (SD of mMRC scores >0) groups. 
Clinical characteristics and outcomes were compared in terms of symptom 
variability.
RESULTS: A total of 407 patients were included in the analysis. Patient age was 
67.2 years and 97.8% of the subjects were male. Initial mMRC was 1.5 and the SD 
of mMRC scores during the first year was 0.5. There were 137 subjects (33.7%) in 
the consistent group and 270 (66.3%) in the variable group. The variable group 
showed a lower FEV1 (P=0.019) and a higher mMRC score (P=0.001). The annual 
incidence of acute exacerbation of COPD (AE-COPD) tended to be higher in the 
variable group (P=0.078) and that of severe AE-COPD was higher in the variable 
group than in the consistent group (P=0.002). The variable group showed a higher 
proportion of annual exacerbators (P=0.001) and frequent exacerbators (P=0.017). 
In multivariate logistic regression analysis, the variable group was 
significantly associated with annual exacerbators (OR =1.963, P=0.011) and 
frequent exacerbators (OR =2.090, P=0.055).
CONCLUSION: COPD patients with symptom variability may have higher exacerbation 
risk as well as lower lung function and more severe respiratory symptoms.

© 2019 Kim et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S203715
PMCID: PMC6759953
PMID: 31571850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


327. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2019 Jan;259:45-52. doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2018.07.004. 
Epub 2018 Jul 21.

Correlation of surface respiratory electromyography with esophageal diaphragm 
electromyography.

Lin L(1), Guan L(2), Wu W(3), Chen R(4).

Author information:
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, China. 
Electronic address: Lyhn_lin@163.com.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, China. 
Electronic address: 15920580342@163.com.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, China. 
Electronic address: write_liang@163.com.
(4)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, China. 
Electronic address: Aileen_mao@163.com.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the correlation between surface respiratory 
electromyography(sEMG) and esophageal diaphragm electromyography(EMGdi) at 
different levels of neural respiratory drive (NRD).
DESIGN: Randomised parallel design controlled trial.
SETTING: The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University.
PARTICIPANTS: 15 healthy subjects and 1 severe to very severe stable COPD 
patients were studied.
INTERVENTIONS: 15 healthy subjects performed incremental inspiratory threshold 
loading (ILT) and 15 stable COPD patients underwent noninvasive positive 
pressure ventilation (NPPV).The correlation between EMGdi and sEMG at different 
NRD levels was analyzed. EMGdi was performed with a multi-pair esophageal 
electrode catheter; sEMG were was performed by surface diaphragm EMG(located in 
right anterior axillary line and left anterior axillary line respectively 
expressed as sEMGdi(r) andsEMGdi(l))、surface parasternal EMG(sEMGpara),and 
surface sternocleidomastoid EMG(sEMGsc).Signals were normalized using the peak 
EMG expressed as EMG%max.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: The mean ± standard deviation resting 
EMGdi%max was higher in patients with COPD than in healthy subjects 
(57.26%±15.45% vs13.64% ±4.96%, respectively; p < 0.001).During ILT and NPPV, 
EMGdi was correlated with sEMGdi (r), sEMGdi (1), sEMGpara and sEMGsc (r = 0.90, 
0.87, 0.90, 0.90 and r = 0.92, 0.83, 0.92 and 0.71, respectively; all 
P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: A strong relationship is present between NRD measured by EMGdi%max 
and NRD measured by sEMG%max. sEMG%max serves as a non-invasive marker of NRD.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2018.07.004
PMID: 30041019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. COPD. 2019 Feb;16(1):93-103. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1598965. Epub 2019 May 
2.

Recovery Following Acute Exacerbations of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
- A Review.

Wageck B(1), Cox NS(1)(2), Holland AE(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Discipline of Physiotherapy , La Trobe University , Melbourne , VIC , 
Australia.
(2)b Institute for Breathing and Sleep , Melbourne , VIC , Australia.
(3)c Department of Physiotherapy , Alfred Hospital , Melbourne , VIC , 
Australia.

Acute exacerbations are associated with disease progression, hospital admission 
and death in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The 
detrimental outcomes associated with acute exacerbations highlights a need to 
understand the time course of recovery following acute exacerbation of COPD 
(AECOPD) so that effective and timely interventions can be provided. The aim of 
this narrative review was to describe the natural recovery in physiology, 
symptoms and function following AECOPD. Substantial recovery of lung function 
and airway inflammation occurs in the first week after onset of an AECOPD, 
whilst systemic inflammatory markers may take up to two weeks to recover. 
Symptoms generally improve over the first 14 days, however marked variation is 
evident between studies and individuals. There are limited data regarding the 
time course of recovery for functional capacity, quality of life and strength. 
In a small number of patients (<10%) recovery of lung function and symptoms has 
not occurred by three months. Features of patients at risk of a prolonged 
recovery following AECOPD include older age, more severe lung disease, presence 
of chronic bronchitis, lower body mass index and more chronic dyspnoea. 
Exacerbation features associated with prolonged recovery are symptoms of the 
common cold at exacerbation onset, evidence of viral infection, more severe 
dyspnoea during the exacerbation and persistent systemic inflammation. In 
clinical practice efforts should be made to recognise prolonged recovery, which 
puts patients at risk of poor outcomes, and to address the consequences of 
AECOPD including physical inactivity and skeletal muscle weakness. Whether 
delivery of specific interventions at distinct time points in the recovery 
process can enhance recovery remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1598965
PMID: 31044644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Thorax. 2019 Nov;74(11):1078-1086. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2018-212957. Epub 2019 
Aug 5.

Cost saving of switching to equivalent inhalers and its effect on health 
outcomes.

Bloom CI(1), Douglas I(2), Olney J(3), D'Ancona G(4), Smeeth L(2), Quint JK(5).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK 
chloe.bloom06@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Faculty of Epidemiology and Public Health, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(3)Centre for Health and Economics Policy Innovation, Imperial College London 
Business School, London, UK.
(4)Pharmacy Department, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust and King's 
College London, London, UK.
(5)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Switching inhalers to cheaper equivalent products is often advocated 
as a necessary cost saving measure, yet the impact on patient's health and 
healthcare utilisation has not been measured.
METHODS: We identified asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
patients from UK primary care electronic healthcare records between 2000 and 
2016. A self-controlled case series was used to estimate incidence rate ratios 
(IRR); comparing outcome rates during the risk period, 3 months after the 
exposure (financially motivated switch), and control periods (preswitch and 
postrisk period). Four outcomes were assessed: disease exacerbation, general 
practitioner consultation, non-specific respiratory events and 
adverse-medication events. Medication possession ratio (MPR) was calculated to 
assess adherence. 2017 National Health Service indicative prices were used to 
estimate cost differences per equivalent dose.
RESULTS: We identified a cohort of 569 901 asthma and 171 231 COPD regular 
inhaler users, 2% and 6% had been switched, respectively. Inhaler switches 
between a brand-to-generic inhaler, and all other switches (brand-to-brand, 
generic-to-generic, generic-to-brand), were associated with reduced 
exacerbations (brand-to-generic: IRR=0.75, 95% CI 0.64 to 0.88; all other: 
IRR=0.79, 95% CI 0.71 to 0.88). Gender, age, therapeutic class, inhaler device 
and inhaler-technique checks did not significantly modify this association 
(p<0.05). The rate of consultations, respiratory-events and adverse-medication 
events did not change significantly (consultations: IRR=1.00, 95% CI 0.99 to 
1.01; respiratory-events: IRR=0.96, 95% CI 0.95 to 0.97; 
adverse-medication-events: IRR=1.05, 95% CI 0.96 to 1.15). Adherence 
significantly increased post-switch (median MPR: pre-switch=54%, 
post-switch=62%; p<0.001). Switching patients, in the cohort of regular inhaler 
users, to the cheapest equivalent inhaler, could have saved around £6 million 
annually.
CONCLUSION: Switching to an equivalent inhaler in patients with asthma or COPD 
appeared safe and did not negatively affect patient's health or healthcare 
utilisation.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2018-212957
PMID: 31383774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: CIB reports grants from 
MRC, AsthmaUK, Chiesi and AstraZeneca outside the submitted work. ID reports 
grants from GSK and the British Pharmaceutical Industry outside the submitted 
work. JO has nothing to disclose. GA reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, BI, 
Chiesi, GSK,Pfizer, Napp, Novartis and Teva outside the submitted work. LS 
reports grants from Wellcome, MRC, NIHR, GKS, BHF and Diabetes UK outside the 
submitted work; reports personal fees and is a Trustee of the British Heart 
Foundation. JKQ reports grants from The Health Foundation, MRC, British Lung 
Foundation, GSK, grants and personal fees from BI, grants and personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, GSK, BI, AZ, Teva, Bayer, IQVIA and Insmed; personal fees 
from Chiesi, GSK, BI, AZ, Teva, Bayer and Insmed.


330. Can Respir J. 2019 Sep 5;2019:3546056. doi: 10.1155/2019/3546056. eCollection 
2019.

The Airways' Mechanical Stress in Lung Disease: Implications for COPD 
Pathophysiology and Treatment Evaluation.

Santus P(1), Pecchiari M(2), Tursi F(3), Valenti V(4), Saad M(1), Radovanovic 
D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Science (DIBIC), Università Degli Studi 
di Milano, Division of Respiratory Diseases, Ospedale L. Sacco-Polo 
Universitario, ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Physiopathology and Transplantation, Università Degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Division of Respiratory Diseases, Ospedale Maggiore di Lodi, ASST Lodi, Lodi, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Health Bioscience, Università Degli Studi di Milano-Respiratory 
Unit, Policlinico di San Donato, IRCCS-San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy.

The airway epithelium stretches and relaxes during the normal respiratory cycle, 
and hyperventilation exaggerates this effect, resulting in changes in lung 
physiology. In fact, stretching of the airways influences lung function and the 
secretion of airway mediators, which in turn may cause a potentially injurious 
inflammatory response. This aim of the present narrative review was to 
illustrate the current evidence on the importance of mechanical stress in the 
pathophysiology of lung diseases with a particular focus on chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and to discuss how this may influence pharmacological 
treatment strategies. Overall, treatment selection should be tailored to 
counterpart the effects of mechanical stress, which influences inflammation both 
in asthma and COPD. The most suitable treatment approach between a long-acting 
β2-agonists/long-acting antimuscarinic-agonist (LABA/LAMA) alone or with the 
addition of inhaled corticosteroids should be determined based on the underlying 
mechanism of inflammation. Noteworthy, the anti-inflammatory effects of the 
glycopyrronium/indacaterol combination on hyperinflation and mucociliary 
clearance may decrease the rate of COPD exacerbations, and it may 
synergistically improve bronchodilation with a double action on both the cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and the acetylcholine pathways.

Copyright © 2019 Pierachille Santus et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/3546056
PMCID: PMC6748188
PMID: 31583033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PS reports research grants from Chiesi 
Farmaceutici, Air Liquide, Pfizer, Almirall, and Boehringer Ingelheim and 
honoraria for lectures and consultancy from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Novartis, Guidotti, Berlin-Chemie, Mundipharma, Zambon Italia, and Valeas. DR 
received honoraria for lectures from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, and 
Neopharmed Gentili and personal fees for participating to advisory boards from 
AstraZeneca. MP, MS, VV, and FT declare no competing or financial interests.


331. Respir Res. 2019 Jun 7;20(1):114. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1080-4.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease upper airway microbiota alpha diversity is 
associated with exacerbation phenotype: a case-control observational study.

Pragman AA(1)(2), Knutson KA(3), Gould TJ(4), Isaacson RE(5), Reilly CS(3), 
Wendt CH(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota and Minneapolis Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, 1 Veterans Dr, Minneapolis, MN, 55417, USA. 
alexa@umn.edu.
(2)Minneapolis VA Health Care System, Attn: Dr. Alexa Pragman, Research Service 
(151), 1 Veterans Drive, Minneapolis, MN, 55417, USA. alexa@umn.edu.
(3)Division of Biostatistics, University of Minnesota School of Public Health, 
University Office Plaza, 2221 University Ave. SE - Suite 200, Minneapolis, MN, 
55414, USA.
(4)University of Minnesota Informatics Institute, Biological Science Dean's 
Office, Room 123 SnH, 6174A, 1475 Gortner Ave, St. Paul, MN, 55108, USA.
(5)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
Room 205G VetS, 6187A, 1971 Commonwealth Ave, St. Paul, MN, 55108, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota and Minneapolis Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, 1 Veterans Dr, Minneapolis, MN, 55417, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) frequent exacerbators 
(FE) suffer increased morbidity and mortality compared to infrequent 
exacerbators (IE). The association between the oral and sputum microbiota and 
exacerbation phenotype is not well defined. The objective of this study was to 
determine key features that differentiate the oral and sputum microbiota of FEs 
from the microbiota of IEs during periods of clinical stability.
METHODS: We recruited 11 FE and 11 IE who had not used antibiotics or systemic 
corticosteroids in the last 1 month. Subjects provided oral wash and sputum 
samples, which underwent 16S V4 MiSeq sequencing and qPCR of 16S rRNA. Data were 
analyzed using Dada2 and R.
RESULTS: FE and IE were similar in terms of age, FEV1 percent predicted 
(FEV1pp), pack-years of tobacco exposure, and St. George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire score. 16S copy numbers were significantly greater in sputum vs. 
oral wash (p = 0.01), but phenotype was not associated with copy number. Shannon 
diversity was significantly greater in oral samples compared to sputum 
(p = 0.001), and IE samples were more diverse than FE samples (p < 0.001). 
Sputum samples from FE had more Haemophilus and Moraxella compared to IE sputum 
samples, due to dominance of these COPD-associated taxa in three FE sputum 
samples. Amplicon sequencing variant (ASV)-level analysis of sputum samples 
revealed one ASV (Actinomyces) was significantly more abundant in IE vs. FE 
sputum (padj = 0.048, Wilcoxon rank-sum test), and this persisted after 
controlling for FEV1pp. Principal coordinate analysis using Bray-Curtis distance 
with PERMANOVA analyses demonstrated clustering by anatomic site, phenotype, 
inhaled corticosteroid use, current tobacco use, COPD severity, and last 
professional dental cleaning.
CONCLUSIONS: FE have less diverse oral and sputum microbiota than IE. 
Actinomyces was significantly more abundant in IE sputum than FE sputum. The 
oral and sputum microbiota of COPD subjects cluster based on multiple clinical 
factors, including exacerbation phenotype. Even during periods of clinical 
stability, the frequent exacerbator phenotype is associated with decreased alpha 
diversity, beta-diversity clustering, and changes in taxonomic abundance.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1080-4
PMCID: PMC6555967
PMID: 31174538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


332. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Mar 1;199(5):581-591. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201712-2506OC.

Increased Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Exacerbations of Likely Viral 
Etiology Follow Elevated Ambient Nitrogen Oxides.

Pfeffer PE(1), Donaldson GC(2), Mackay AJ(2), Wedzicha JA(2).

Author information:
(1)1 William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom; and.
(2)2 Respiratory Division, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Mar 1;199(5):547-548.

RATIONALE: Epidemiologic research strongly supports an association between air 
pollution and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations. Numerous 
mechanisms may underlie any association because pollutants are toxic to 
pulmonary cells and may increase susceptibility to respiratory infections. The 
relationship between ambient pollution and exacerbation etiology has not been 
studied.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the characteristics of pollution-associated 
exacerbations and whether the association is specific to exacerbations of 
infective or noninfective etiology.
METHODS: We analyzed the effect of preceding ambient particulate matter less 
than or equal to 10 μm in aerodynamic diameter, oxides of nitrogen (NOx), and 
ozone on characterized chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations in a 
regression model adjusted for temperature, seasonality, and long-term trend. We 
specifically examined associations with exacerbations of suspected viral and/or 
bacterial, or noninfective etiology. For the associations identified we further 
examined the characteristics of pollution-associated exacerbations.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: A total of 4,173 exacerbations occurred over the 
20-year study period. Higher ambient NOx was consistently associated with 
increased viral-type exacerbations at 2-4 days lag (P = 0.010). Recovery for 
viral-type exacerbations after higher ambient NOx was significantly prolonged. 
These findings were consistent in the subset of 2,841 exacerbations treated with 
oral corticosteroids or antibiotics, with recovery 1.29 (95% confidence 
interval, 1.17-1.42; P < 0.001) times longer with viral-type exacerbations of 
onset 3 days after above- versus below-median ambient NOx. A likely bimodal 
association of particulate matter less than or equal to 10 μm in aerodynamic 
diameter with infective exacerbations was also evident and supported by a daily 
time-series analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher levels of ambient NOx are associated with prolonged 
exacerbations of likely viral etiology, supporting toxicologic effects of air 
pollution that increase susceptibility to, and severity of, infection.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201712-2506OC
PMID: 30157387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2019 Apr;32(2):143-151. doi: 10.1097/QCO.0000000000000533.

Acute exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: should we use 
antibiotics and if so, which ones?

Jacobs DM(1), Pandit U(2), Sethi S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences.
(2)Department of Medicine, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Acute exacerbations are a major cause of morbidity and 
mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with evidence 
suggesting at least 50% of exacerbations involve bacteria that benefit from 
antibiotic treatment. Here, we review the most relevant data regarding the use 
of antibiotics in exacerbations of COPD and provide insights on the selection of 
initial antibiotic therapy for their treatment.
RECENT FINDINGS: Identification of bacterial exacerbations still relies on 
clinical assessment rather than laboratory biomarkers. Several recent studies, 
including a meta-analysis and placebo-controlled trials, demonstrate improved 
outcomes with antibiotics in all but mild exacerbations of COPD, including both 
inpatient and outpatient. A broader antibiotic regimen should be used for 
patients who have risk factors for poor outcomes. A risk-stratification approach 
can guide antibiotic choice, although the stratification algorithm still needs 
to be validated in a randomized controlled trial.
SUMMARY: The use of antibiotics for the treatment of moderate-to-severe 
suspected bacterial exacerbations in COPD is supported by published trials and 
evidence-based systematic reviews. Recent trials also show differences in 
outcomes based on antibiotic choice. More research is necessary to evaluate risk 
stratification approaches when selecting initial antibiotic therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/QCO.0000000000000533
PMID: 30672788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Am Board Fam Med. 2020 Mar-Apr;33(2):289-302. doi: 
10.3122/jabfm.2020.02.190227.

Inhaled Corticosteroid Treatment in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
(COPD): Boon or Bane?

Kaplan AG(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Family Physician Airways Group of Canada, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada (AGK) for4kids@gmail.com.

Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)-based therapy is often used for patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, this approach is under 
scrutiny because of ICS overuse in patients for whom it is not recommended and 
because of concerns about adverse events, particularly pneumonia, with long-term 
ICS use. Evidence suggests ICS may be beneficial in specific patients, namely, 
those with high blood eosinophil counts (eg, ≥300 cells/µL) or who are at a high 
risk of exacerbations. According to the Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2020 ABCD assessment tool, these patients belong 
in group D. For these patients, recommended initial treatment includes ICS in 
combination with long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs) when blood eosinophil counts 
are ≥300 cells/µL or LABA + long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) when 
patients are highly symptomatic, that is, with greater dyspnea and/or exercise 
limitation. Follow-up treatments for patients with persistent dyspnea and/or 
exacerbations may include LABA + ICS, LABA + LAMA, or LABA + LAMA + ICS, with 
use of ICS being guided by blood eosinophil counts. In this review, differences 
in the inflammatory mechanism underlying COPD and asthma and the role of ICS 
treatment in COPD are summarized. Furthermore, findings from recent clinical 
trials where use of ICS-based dual or triple therapy in COPD was compared with 
LABA + LAMA therapy and trials in which ICS withdrawal was evaluated in patients 
with COPD are reviewed. Finally, a step-by-step guide for ICS withdrawal in 
patients who are unlikely to benefit from this treatment is proposed. A video of 
the author discussing the overall takeaway of the review article could be 
downloaded from the link provided: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uq7Sr5jqPDI.

© Copyright 2020 by the American Board of Family Medicine.

DOI: 10.3122/jabfm.2020.02.190227
PMID: 32179613

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: AK serves on the advisory 
board and speakers’ bureau for Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Purdue, Teva, 
Trudel, and Novartis; serves on the advisory board for GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, 
Paladin, and Novo Nordisk; is a speaker for Grifols and Merck Frosst; and an 
advisor on Johnson and Johnson’s smoking cessation website design, outside of 
the submitted work.


335. BMC Pulm Med. 2019 Mar 22;19(1):68. doi: 10.1186/s12890-019-0833-7.

Risk of acute exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease associated 
with biomass smoke compared with tobacco smoke.

Cho J(1), Lee CH(2), Hwang SS(3), Kim KU(4), Lee SH(5), Park HY(6), Park SJ(7), 
Min KH(8), Oh YM(9), Yoo KH(10), Jung KS(11); KOLD and KOCOSS Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 
03080, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 
03080, Republic of Korea. kauri670@empal.com.
(3)Department of Public Health Science, Graduate School of Public Health, Seoul 
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University School of 
Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, St. Paul's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Chonbuk National University Medical School, 
Jeonju, Republic of Korea.
(8)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(9)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(10)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Konkuk University Medical Center, Konkuk University School of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(11)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University 
College of Medicine, Anyang, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Risk of exacerbations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) associated with biomass smoke has not been well addressed, although 
biomass smoke is similar in composition to tobacco smoke.
METHODS: To investigate whether the risk of exacerbations in COPD associated 
with biomass smoke differs from that in COPD associated with tobacco smoke, we 
recruited patients with COPD from two Korean multicenter prospective cohorts. In 
a multiple linear regression model, the standardized regression coefficient (β) 
of biomass smoke exposure ≥25 years was most similar to that (β') of tobacco 
smoke exposure ≥10 pack-years (β = - 0.13 and β' = - 0.14). We grouped patients 
with COPD into four categories based on the above cut-offs: Less Tobacco-Less 
Biomass, Less Tobacco-More Biomass, More Tobacco-Less Biomass, and More 
Tobacco-More Biomass. The main outcome was the incidence of moderate or severe 
exacerbations.
RESULTS: Among 1033 patients with COPD, 107 were included in Less Tobacco-Less 
Biomass (mean age: 67 years, men: 67%), 40 in Less Tobacco-More Biomass (mean 
age: 70 years, men: 35%), 631 in More Tobacco-Less Biomass (mean age: 68 years, 
men: 98%), and 255 in More Tobacco-More Biomass (mean age: 69 years, men: 97%). 
The incidence rates of exacerbations were not significantly different between 
Less Tobacco-More Biomass and More Tobacco-Less Biomass (adjusted incidence rate 
ratio, 1.03; 95% confidence interval, 0.56-1.89; P = 0.921). No interaction 
between sex and tobacco and biomass smoke was observed. When propensity score 
matching with available covariates including age and sex was applied, a similar 
result was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with COPD associated with biomass smoke and those with 
COPD associated with tobacco smoke had a similar risk of exacerbations. This 
suggests that patients with COPD associated with biomass smoke should be treated 
actively.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-019-0833-7
PMCID: PMC6429752
PMID: 30902075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
present study was approved by the institutional review board of the Seoul 
National University Hospital (H-1706-079-859) and was conducted in accordance 
with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants in the cohorts 
provided written informed consent. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


336. Respir Med. 2019 Mar;148:43-48. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.01.010. Epub 2019 Jan 
24.

Monitoring peak expiratory flow could predict COPD exacerbations: A prospective 
observational study.

Cen J(1), Ma H(2), Chen Z(2), Weng L(3), Deng Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Medical School 
of Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China; Department of Respiratory 
Medicine, Ningbo No. 9 Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Medical School 
of Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ningbo No. 9 Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang, 
China. Electronic address: wengjensen@sina.com.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Medical School 
of Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China. Electronic address: 
dzcrespiratory123@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (ECOPD) is an 
important event during the course of the disease. It causes a more rapid decline 
in lung function, which is associated with hospitalization and the risk of 
death. Therefore, it is essential to discover approaches to early detection and 
prevention of ECOPD. Peak expiratory flow (PEF) can be safely used instead of 
spirometry which can assess the severity of COPD as a standard tool. We 
hypothesized that monitoring PEF could possibly be used to predict the ECOPD.
METHOD: To verify this hypothesis, daily morning PEF was monitored for 6 months 
in 53 patients with moderate to severe COPD (mean FEV1 31.53%predicted) who were 
enrolled in Ningbo, China.
RESULT: A total of 69 exacerbations of COPD (63 of gradual onset, six of sudden 
onset) were recorded in this study. Thirty cases (43.5%) of gradual onset 
exacerbations needed to be hospitalized, and the mean PEF significantly 
decreased (vs baseline) during the 5 days that preceded those exacerbations 
(from 161.9 ± 39.4 L/min to 137.9 ± 36.1 L/min, P < 0.05, statistical 
power = 0.92). However, this was not the case with non-hospitalized 
exacerbations (from 175.4 ± 42.5 L/min to 161.5 ± 39.3 L/min, P = 0.172, 
statistical power = 0.63). The ROC analysis demonstrated that 24 h before 
hospitalized exacerbation, the optimal cutoff value of ΔPEF for its prediction 
was 28 L/min (17% from baseline), with a sensitivity and specificity of 76.7% 
and 72.7%, respectively (area under the curve [AUC] = 0.84, P < 0.05, 
statistical power = 0.78). While 48 h before hospitalized exacerbation, the 
optimal cutoff value of ΔPEF for its prediction was 14 L/min (9% from baseline), 
with a sensitivity and specificity of 86.7% and 66.7%, respectively 
(AUC = 0.863, P < 0.05, statistical power = 0.87).
CONCLUSIONS: As a rapid, inexpensive method, PEF could be used for the 
prediction and early detection of hospitalized exacerbation of COPD. This may 
provide opportunity for early intervention of ECOPD.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.01.010
PMID: 30827473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Respir Res. 2019 May 27;20(1):104. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1078-y.

Efficacy and safety profile of mucolytic/antioxidant agents in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: a comparative analysis across erdosteine, 
carbocysteine, and N-acetylcysteine.

Rogliani P(1), Matera MG(2), Page C(3), Puxeddu E(4), Cazzola M(4), Calzetta 
L(4).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Via Montpellier 1, 00133, Rome, Italy. 
paola.rogliani@uniroma2.it.
(2)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(3)Sackler Institute of Pulmonary Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Science, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Via Montpellier 1, 00133, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: To date there are no head-to-head studies comparing different 
mucolytic/antioxidant agents. Considering the inconsistent evidence resulting 
from the pivotal studies on mucolytic/antioxidant agents tested in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and the recent publication of Reducing 
Exacerbations and Symptoms by Treatment with ORal Erdosteine in COPD (RESTORE) 
study, we have performed a meta-analysis to compare the efficacy and safety of 
erdosteine 600 mg/day, carbocysteine 1500 mg/day, and N-acetylcysteine (NAC) 
1200 mg/day in COPD.
METHODS: A pairwise and network meta-analyses were performed to assess the 
efficacy of erdosteine, carbocysteine, and NAC on acute exacerbation of COPD 
(AECOPD), duration of AECOPD, and hospitalization. The frequency of adverse 
events (AEs) was also investigated.
RESULTS: Data obtained from 2753 COPD patients were extracted from 7 RCTs 
published between 2004 and 2017. In the pairwise meta-analysis 
mucolytic/antioxidant agents significantly reduced the risk of AECOPD (RR 0.74 
95%CI 0.68-0.80). The network meta-analysis provided the following rank of 
effectiveness: erdosteine>carbocysteine>NAC. Only erdosteine reduced the risk of 
experiencing at least one AECOPD (P < 0.01) and the risk of hospitalization due 
to AECOPD (P < 0.05). Erdosteine and NAC both significantly reduced the duration 
of AECOPD (P < 0.01). The AEs induced by erdosteine, carbocysteine, and NAC were 
mild in severity and generally well tolerated. The quality of evidence of this 
quantitative synthesis is moderate.
CONCLUSIONS: The overall efficacy/safety profile of erdosteine is superior to 
that of both carbocysteine and NAC. Future head-to-head studies performed on the 
same COPD populations are needed to definitely confirm the results of this 
meta-analysis.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: CRD42016053762 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1078-y
PMCID: PMC6537173
PMID: 31133026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PR participated as a lecturer, speaker, and 
advisor in scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, 
AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Group, Mundipharma, and Novartis. Her department was 
funded by Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Zambon and Chiesi 
Farmaceutici. MGM has participated as a lecturer, speaker, and advisor in 
scientific meetings and courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline and Novartis, and has 
been a consultant to Chiesi Farmaceutici. CP has acted as a Consultant for 
Recipharma, ImmunoRegulation, PrEP Biopharma, Ockham Biosciences and Eurodrug. 
CP also owns equity in Verona Pharma who are developing novel drugs for the 
treatment of respiratory diseases. EP has no conflict of interest to declare. MC 
has participated as a lecturer, speaker, and advisor in scientific meetings and 
courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca, Biofutura, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi Farmaceutici, GlaxoSmithKline, Menarini Group, Lallemand, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Verona Pharma, and Zambon, and has been a 
consultant to ABC Farmaceutici, Recipharm, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Lallemand, 
Novartis, Verona Pharma, and Zambon. His department was funded by Almirall, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Zambon. LC has participated as advisor in 
scientific meetings under the sponsorship of Boehringer Ingelheim and Novartis, 
received non-financial support by AstraZeneca, received a research grant 
partially funded by Chiesi Farmaceutici, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and 
Almirall, and is or has been a consultant to ABC Farmaceutici, Recipharm, 
Zambon, Verona Pharma, and Ockham Biotech. His department was funded by 
Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Zambon and Chiesi Farmaceutici.


338. Front Physiol. 2019 Oct 1;10:1235. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01235. eCollection 
2019.

AIM2/IL-1α/TGF-β Axis in PBMCs From Exacerbated Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease (COPD) Patients Is Not Related to COX-2-Dependent Inflammatory Pathway.

Molino A(1), Terlizzi M(2), Colarusso C(2)(3), Rossi A(4), Somma P(5), Saglia 
A(1), Pinto A(2), Sorrentino R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Respiratory Division, University of 
Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, Fisciano, Italy.
(3)Ph.D. Program in Drug Discovery and Development, Department of Pharmacy, 
University of Salerno, Fisciano, Italy.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples 
Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Pathology, Ospedale dei Colli "Monaldi-CTO", 
Naples, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a lung disorder characterized by 
persistent respiratory symptoms and progressive airflow limitation as a 
consequence of a chronic inflammatory response. Corticosteroids are the main 
treatment for COPD patients with a history of exacerbation, in that they 
attenuate exacerbation and dyspnea, and improve the response to bronchodilators. 
Nevertheless, despite corticosteroid administration, COPD patients still undergo 
exacerbation phases. In this context, the aim of this study was to evaluate the 
activity of Absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) inflammasome-dependent pathways under 
corticosteroid treatment during COPD exacerbation. Stable and exacerbated 
COPD-derived Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) were treated with a 
well-known anti-inflammatory agent, Dexamethasone (DEX), in the presence or not 
of Poly (deoxyadenylic-deoxythymidylate) acid (Poly dA:dT), an AIM2 ligand. We 
found that IL-1α was highly increased when AIM2 was activated from Poly dA:dT in 
exacerbated, but not in stable, COPD-derived PBMCs. To note, the release of 
IL-1α after the stimulation of AIM2 in PBMCs obtained from stable (hospitalized) 
COPD patients was not higher from the basal conditions, though it was still as 
high as that observed for Poly dA:dT-stimulated PBMCs obtained from exacerbated 
patients. This effect was associated with a higher expression of AIM2 in 
pair-matched circulating CD14+ cells obtained from hospitalized patients who 
passed from the exacerbation to stable status. Because the difference between 
stable and exacerbated COPD patients relies on the treatment with 
corticosteroids, exacerbated and stable COPD-derived PBMCs were treated with 
DEX. Indeed, the release of IL-1α and TGF-β was not altered after DEX treatment. 
In conclusion, we found that the administration of DEX in vitro on exacerbated 
COPD-derived PBMCs was not able to revert the detrimental inflammatory mechanism 
associated with AIM2 activation responsible for the release of IL-1α and the 
ensuing TGF-β, contributing to the severity of disease.

Copyright © 2019 Molino, Terlizzi, Colarusso, Rossi, Somma, Saglia, Pinto and 
Sorrentino.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01235
PMCID: PMC6780005
PMID: 31632288


339. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 May 1;201(9):e56-e69. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.202003-0625ST.

Pharmacologic Management of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. An Official 
American Thoracic Society Clinical Practice Guideline.

Nici L, Mammen MJ, Charbek E, Alexander PE, Au DH, Boyd CM, Criner GJ, Donaldson 
GC, Dreher M, Fan VS, Gershon AS, Han MK, Krishnan JA, Martinez FJ, Meek PM, 
Morgan M, Polkey MI, Puhan MA, Sadatsafavi M, Sin DD, Washko GR, Wedzicha JA, 
Aaron SD.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 May 1;201(9):1022-1023.

Background: This document provides clinical recommendations for the 
pharmacologic treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It 
represents a collaborative effort on the part of a panel of expert COPD 
clinicians and researchers along with a team of methodologists under the 
guidance of the American Thoracic Society.Methods: Comprehensive evidence 
syntheses were performed on all relevant studies that addressed the clinical 
questions and critical patient-centered outcomes agreed upon by the panel of 
experts. The evidence was appraised, rated, and graded, and recommendations were 
formulated using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and 
Evaluation approach.Results: After weighing the quality of evidence and 
balancing the desirable and undesirable effects, the guideline panel made the 
following recommendations: 1) a strong recommendation for the use of long-acting 
β2-agonist (LABA)/long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) combination therapy 
over LABA or LAMA monotherapy in patients with COPD and dyspnea or exercise 
intolerance; 2) a conditional recommendation for the use of triple therapy with 
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)/LABA/LAMA over dual therapy with LABA/LAMA in 
patients with COPD and dyspnea or exercise intolerance who have experienced one 
or more exacerbations in the past year; 3) a conditional recommendation for ICS 
withdrawal for patients with COPD receiving triple therapy (ICS/LABA/LAMA) if 
the patient has had no exacerbations in the past year; 4) no recommendation for 
or against ICS as an additive therapy to long-acting bronchodilators in patients 
with COPD and blood eosinophilia, except for those patients with a history of 
one or more exacerbations in the past year requiring antibiotics or oral 
steroids or hospitalization, for whom ICS is conditionally recommended as an 
additive therapy; 5) a conditional recommendation against the use of maintenance 
oral corticosteroids in patients with COPD and a history of severe and frequent 
exacerbations; and 6) a conditional recommendation for opioid-based therapy in 
patients with COPD who experience advanced refractory dyspnea despite otherwise 
optimal therapy.Conclusions: The task force made recommendations regarding the 
pharmacologic treatment of COPD based on currently available evidence. 
Additional research in populations that are underrepresented in clinical trials 
is needed, including studies in patients with COPD 80 years of age and older, 
those with multiple chronic health conditions, and those with a codiagnosis of 
COPD and asthma.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.202003-0625ST
PMCID: PMC7193862
PMID: 32283960


340. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jun 10;14:1267-1280. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S207775. eCollection 2019.

Withdrawal of inhaled corticosteroids in COPD patients: rationale and 
algorithms.

Avdeev S(1)(2), Aisanov Z(3), Arkhipov V(4), Belevskiy A(3), Leshchenko I(5), 
Ovcharenko S(6), Shmelev E(7), Miravitlles M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical 
University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(2)Clinical Department, Federal Pulmonology Research Institute, Federal Medical 
and Biological Agency of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(3)Department of Pulmonology, N.I. Pirogov Russian State National Research 
Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapy, Russian Medical Academy of 
Continuous Professional Education, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(5)Department of Phthisiology, Pulmonology and Thoracic Surgery, Ural State 
Medical University, Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation.
(6)Department of Internal Diseases No.1, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State 
Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(7)Department of Differential Diagnostics, Federal Central Research Institute of 
Tuberculosis, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(8)Pneumology Department, University Hospital Vall d'Hebron/Vall d'Hebron 
Research Institute (VHIR), Ciber de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 
Barcelona, Spain.

Observational studies indicate that overutilization of inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS) is common in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Overprescription and the high risk of serious ICS-related adverse events make 
withdrawal of this treatment necessary in patients for whom the 
treatment-related risks outweigh the expected benefits. Elaboration of an 
optimal, universal, user-friendly algorithm for withdrawal of ICS therapy has 
been identified as an important clinical need. This article reviews the 
available evidence on the efficacy, risks, and indications of ICS in COPD, as 
well as the benefits of ICS treatment withdrawal in patients for whom its use is 
not recommended by current guidelines. After discussing proposed approaches to 
ICS withdrawal published by professional associations and individual authors, we 
present a new algorithm developed by consensus of an international group of 
experts in the field of COPD. This relatively simple algorithm is based on 
consideration and integrated assessment of the most relevant factors (markers) 
influencing decision-making, such a history of exacerbations, peripheral blood 
eosinophil count, presence of infection, and risk of community-acquired 
pneumonia.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S207775
PMCID: PMC6572750
PMID: 31354256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Dr Sergey Avdeev has received 
speaker/consultancy fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Teva, 
and Novartis; and research grants from AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and 
Novartis, outside the submitted work. Professor Dr Zaurbek Aisanov has received 
speaker/consultancy fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Teva, 
Novartis, and GlaxoSmithKline; and research grants from AstraZeneca, 
GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis, outside the submitted work. Professor Dr Vladimir 
Arkhipov has received speaker/consultancy fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Teva, and Astrllas; non-financial support from Boehringer 
Ingelheim; and research grants from AstraZeneca, outside the submitted work. 
Professor Dr Andrey Belevskiy has received speaker/consultancy fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, and Novartis, outside the submitted 
work. Professor Dr Igor Leshchenko has received speaker/consultancy fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Teva, and Novartis, outside the 
submitted work. Professor Dr Svetlana Ovcharenkohas received speaker/consultancy 
fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, and Novartis, outside the 
submitted work. Professor Dr Evgeny Shmelev has received speaker/consultancy 
fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Roche, Teva, and Novartis, 
outside the submitted work. Dr Marc Miravitlles has received speaker fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, Menarini, Rovi, Bial, CSL Behring, Grifols, 
and Novartis; consultancy fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Bial, Gebro Pharma, CSL Behring, Laboratories Esteve, Mereo 
BioPharm, Verona Pharma, pH Pharma, Novartis, and Grifols; and research grants 
from GlaxoSmithKline and Grifols, outside the submitted work.


341. Int J Pharm. 2019 May 1;562:351-358. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2019.03.059. Epub 
2019 Mar 29.

Salmeterol Xinafoate (SX) loaded into mucoadhesive solid lipid microparticles 
for COPD treatment.

Amore E(1), Manca ML(2), Ferraro M(3), Valenti D(2), La Parola V(4), Di Vincenzo 
S(3), Gjomarkaj M(3), Giammona G(5), Bondì ML(4), Pace E(6).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche, Chimiche e Farmaceutiche 
(STEBICEF), Università degli Studi di Palermo, Via Archirafi 32, 90123 Palermo, 
Italy; Istituto per lo Studio dei Materiali Nanostrutturati (ISMN), U.O.S. 
Palermo, CNR, Via Ugo La Malfa, 153, 90146 Palermo, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento Scienze della Vita e dell'Ambiente, Sezione Scienze del Farmaco, 
Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Via Ospedale 72, 09124 Cagliari, Italy.
(3)Istituto di Biomedicina e Immunologia Molecolare (IBIM), CNR, Via Ugo La 
Malfa, 153, 90146 Palermo, Italy.
(4)Istituto per lo Studio dei Materiali Nanostrutturati (ISMN), U.O.S. Palermo, 
CNR, Via Ugo La Malfa, 153, 90146 Palermo, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche, Chimiche e Farmaceutiche 
(STEBICEF), Università degli Studi di Palermo, Via Archirafi 32, 90123 Palermo, 
Italy.
(6)Istituto di Biomedicina e Immunologia Molecolare (IBIM), CNR, Via Ugo La 
Malfa, 153, 90146 Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: pace@ibim.cnr.it.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the main health problems 
worldwide. It is characterised by chronic inflammation in the lungs that leads 
to progressive, chronic, largely irreversible airflow obstruction. The use of 
long-acting β agonists remain today the frontline treatment for COPD with the 
aim of minimizing side effects and enhancing therapeutic usefulness. To this 
purpose, in this paper, mucoadhesive solid lipid microparticles (SLMs) 
containing a long-acting β-2 agonist, Salmeterol Xinafoate (SX) were prepared, 
characterised (size, z-potential, aerodynamic diameter, turbidimetric 
evaluations, drug loading and entrapping efficiency) and tested in a model of 
bronchial epithelial cells. It was demonstrated that the incorporation of SX 
into SLMs led to the production of particles suitable for inhalation and more 
efficient than the free molecule at increasing the cAMP expression in bronchial 
epithelial cells. In conclusion, the prepared systems, due to their aerodynamic 
behaviour and mucoadhesive properties, could improve the retention time of SX in 
the lung epithelium and its therapeutic effect, thus representing a good 
strategy for the treatment of COPD patients.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2019.03.059
PMID: 30935915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Chest. 2019 May;155(5):918-927. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.12.021. Epub 2019 Jan 
23.

Prevalence of Atrial Fibrillation in Hospital Encounters With End-Stage COPD on 
Home Oxygen: National Trends in the United States.

Xiao X(1), Han H(1), Wu C(1), He Q(1), Ruan Y(1), Zhai Y(2), Gao Y(2), Zhao 
X(2), He J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Statistics, Second Military Medical University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Health Statistics, Second Military Medical University, 
Shanghai, China; Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. 
Electronic address: hejia63@yeah.net.

Comment in
    Chest. 2019 May;155(5):888-889.
    Chest. 2019 Dec;156(6):1269-1270.
    Chest. 2019 Dec;156(6):1270-1271.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to evaluate the prevalence of atrial fibrillation 
(AF) in hospital encounters with end-stage COPD on home oxygen admitted for COPD 
exacerbation.
METHODS: We used the 2003 to 2014 Nationwide Inpatient Sample to conduct a 
retrospective analysis. This study included all patients ≥ 18 years of age with 
a primary diagnosis of COPD on home oxygen who were hospitalized for COPD 
exacerbation. We used multivariate-adjusted models to evaluate the association 
of AF with clinical factors, cost, length of stay, and hospital outcomes.
RESULTS: In total, 1,345,270 patients were included; of these, 244,488 (18.2%) 
had AF. The AF prevalence increased from 12.9% in 2003 to 21.3% in 2014 (P < 
.0001) and varied by age, sex, race, income, insurance type, and hospital 
region. Advancing age, female sex, white race, high income, and large hospital 
size were associated with increased odds of AF. Presence of AF was a risk 
predictor for in-hospital death (OR, 1.54; 95% CI, 1.45-1.65), acute respiratory 
failure (OR, 1.09; 95% CI, 1.06-1.12), invasive mechanical ventilation (OR, 
1.37; 95% CI, 1.29-1.47), noninvasive mechanical ventilation (OR, 1.14; 95% CI, 
1.09-1.18), acute kidney injury (OR, 1.09; 95% CI, 1.04-1.13), sepsis (OR, 1.23; 
95% CI, 1.10-1.37), and stroke (OR, 1.80; 95% CI, 1.40-2.32). AF was also 
associated with increased cost and length of stay.
CONCLUSIONS: AF prevalence in hospital encounters with end-stage COPD increased 
from 2003 to 2014. Better management strategies for patients with end-stage COPD 
comorbid with AF are needed, especially in elderly individuals.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.12.021
PMID: 30684473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Int J Pharm Compd. 2020 May-Jun;24(3):242-245.

Physicochemical Stability and Compatibility of Revefenacin (LAMA) and Formoterol 
Fumarate (LABA) Inhalation Solution Admixture.

Ngim K(1), Patel J(2).

Author information:
(1)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, California. 
kngim@theravance.com.
(2)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, California.

Revefenacin inhalation solution, a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), and 
formoterol fumarate inhalation solution, a long-acting ß-agonist (LABA), are 
indicated for the maintenance treatment of patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. LAMA or LABA monotherapy, or a combination of LAMA/LABA for 
more severe symptoms, is recommended as first-line treatment in this patient 
population. We conducted a study to test the physicochemical properties of 
revefenacin and formoterol fumarate inhalation solution admixture in support of 
a clinical trial evaluating the safety of these nebulized 
bronchodilators, administered in sequence, and as a combination, in patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (NCT03573817). The admixture of these 
two products was evaluated for changes in appearance, pH, osmolality, active 
drug content, purity, and impurity/degradant levels at 25°C for up to 25 hours. 
No substantial changes were observed in the physicochemical properties of 
revefenacin inhalation solution and formoterol fumarate inhalation solution 
admixture, demonstrating the physicochemical compatibility and stability of the 
two drugs in solution for up to 25 hours at room temperature.

Copyright© by International Journal of Pharmaceutical Compounding, Inc.

PMID: 32401744


344. COPD. 2019 Apr;16(2):126-132. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1615872. Epub 2019 Jun 
4.

Consequences of Changing the GOLD Reports (2007-2011-2017) on the Treatment 
Regimen of Patients with COPD.

Brożek GM(1), Nowak M(2), Zejda JE(1), Jankowski M(1), Lawson J(3)(4), 
Pierzchała W(5).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Epidemiology, School of Medicine in Katowice, Medical 
University of Silesia in Katowice , Katowice , Poland.
(2)b ADAMED Group , Czosnow , Poland.
(3)c Canadian Centre for Health and Safety in Agriculture, College of Medicine, 
University of Saskatchewan , Saskatoon , SK , Canada.
(4)d Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan , 
Saskatoon , SK , Canada.
(5)e Polish Respiratory Society, Warsaw, Poland.

Detailed treatment regimens for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) were developed by the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease (GOLD). Every few years the method of classification of COPD 
severity and the treatment recommendations are significantly revised. The aim of 
this study was to determine the clinical implications of changing GOLD reports 
(2007-2011-2017) and the impact that these changes would have on pharmacological 
treatment regimens of patients with COPD. A group of 500 randomly chosen primary 
care physicians in Poland each provided information on 10 consecutive patients 
diagnosed with COPD. This data was used to simulate the therapeutic consequences 
of the update of the GOLD 2007 report to GOLD 2011 and GOLD 2017. 
Pharmacological treatment algorithms from the GOLD 2007 report prefer the use of 
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and short-acting bronchodilators (60.2% and 50%, 
respectively). Compared to the GOLD 2007 report, there would be an almost 
eightfold reduction in the frequency of short-acting bronchodilator using the 
GOLD 2011 report and over fourfold decrease using the GOLD 2017 report. With 
each subsequent update of the GOLD report, the frequency of use of ICS would be 
significantly (p < 0.001) reduced. Pharmacological treatment by the GOLD 2011 
and 2017 reports would be dominated by the use of long-acting bronchodilators 
from the group β2-agonists and muscarinic antagonist groups. Updates from the 
GOLD 2007 COPD report to GOLD 2011 and 2017 would have a significant impact on 
everyday clinical practice. Changes would result in a reduction of treatment 
intensity.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1615872
PMID: 31161814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS One. 2019 Jun 6;14(6):e0217803. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0217803. 
eCollection 2019.

Deficient pulmonary IFN-β expression in COPD patients.

García-Valero J(1), Olloquequi J(1)(2), Montes JF(1), Rodríguez E(3), 
Martín-Satué M(4)(5), Texidó L(4), Ferrer Sancho J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Faculty of Biology, 
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidad Autónoma de Chile, Talca, 
Chile.
(3)Department of Pneumology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona and CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Pathology and Experimental Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2019 Jul 1;14(7):e0219349.

COPD patients are prone to acute infectious exacerbations that impair their 
quality of life and hamper prognosis. The purpose of the present study was to 
investigate the in situ IFN-β response in the lungs of stable COPD and non-COPD 
patients. Lung samples from 70 subjects (9 control never smokers, 19 control 
smokers without COPD, 21 patients with moderate COPD and 21 patients with very 
severe COPD) were studied for the expression of IFN-β, its main transcription 
factor, IRF-7, and two products of its autocrine function, namely RIG-I and 
MDA-5, by immunohistochemical techniques and quantitative real-time PCR. IFN-β, 
IRF-7, RIG-I and MDA-5 were widely detected in most lung cell types. In 
epithelial tissues and alveolar macrophages, IFN-β and IRF-7 labeling scores 
were decreased up to 65% and 74%, respectively, for COPD patients, paralleling 
an analogous reduction (43% and 65%, respectively) in the amount of their lung 
mRNA. Moreover, this decreased production of IFN-β in COPD patients correlated 
with a similar decrease in the expression of RIG-I and MDA-5, two essential 
members of the innate immune system. Our study indicates that most lung cells 
from stable COPD patients show a constitutive decreased expression of IFN-β, 
IRF-7, RIG-I and MDA-5, suggesting that this deficiency is the main cause of 
their acute viral exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0217803
PMCID: PMC6553750
PMID: 31170225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


346. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 26;14:2205-2217. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S213947. eCollection 2019.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease In Aboriginal Patients Of The Northern 
Territory Of Australia: A Landscape Perspective.

Heraganahally SS(1)(2)(3)(4), Wasgewatta SL(1), McNamara K(2)(3), Eisemberg 
CC(5), Budd RC(1), Mehra S(1)(3)(6), Sajkov D(2)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Royal Darwin Hospital, Darwin, NT, Australia.
(2)Flinders University - College of Medicine and Public Health, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia.
(3)Northern Territory Medical School, Charles Darwin University, Darwin, NT, 
Australia.
(4)Darwin Respiratory and Sleep Health, Darwin, NT, Australia.
(5)Research Institute for the Environment and Livelihoods, Charles Darwin 
University, Darwin, NT, Australia.
(6)Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia.
(7)Australian Respiratory and Sleep Medicine Institute, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The Aboriginal population of Australia has a higher burden of 
chronic health conditions than non-Aboriginal Australians. However, there is a 
paucity of data on clinical and demographic characteristics of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in this population.
METHOD: In this retrospective study we evaluated the clinical, demographic and 
environmental influences in adult Aboriginal patients with COPD living in the 
regional and remote communities of the Northern Territory of Australia.
RESULTS: There were 380 patients (49%) with a diagnosis of COPD of the 767 
patients referred to specialist respiratory outreach clinics. The mean age was 
57 years (56% were female) and mean±SD BMI was 24.30±7.01 kg/m2. Smoking history 
was noted in 93% of the study cohort. The most common respiratory symptom was 
shortness of breath in 62%, and inhaled medications (salbutamol, tiotropium, 
salmeterol/fluticasone) were used by 79%, 44% and 58% of patients, respectively. 
Spirometry showed obstructive impairment (FEV1/FVC <0.7) in 79% (0.56±0.17), 
with mean FEV1 42% of predicted, and a bronchodilator response was present in 
28.6%. Comorbid bronchiectasis was diagnosed in 49.8% along with COPD. The 
relationship between COPD and community demography showed a higher proportion of 
smokers and those with underlying bronchiectasis to have lower FEV1/FVC ratios. 
Communities with a higher proportion of asthma were younger and had higher 
smoking rates. Mortality increased with increasing number of exacerbations and 
hospital admissions.
CONCLUSION: The Aboriginal population with COPD has a higher prevalence of 
smoking, moderate to severe airflow obstruction on spirometry and frequently 
co-diagnosed bronchiectasis with increased severity of ventilatory impairment.

© 2019 Heraganahally et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S213947
PMCID: PMC6769027
PMID: 31576117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


347. Ter Arkh. 2019 Mar 30;91(3):76-85. doi: 10.26442/00403660.2019.03.000136.

New opportunities of dual bronchodilation therapy for patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Avdeev SN(1)(2), Trushenko NV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University of the Ministry of Health 
of the Russian Federation (Sechenov University), Moscow, Russia.
(2)Pulmonology Scientific Research Institute under Federal Medical and 
Biological Agency of Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia.

Currently, combinations of long-acting beta2-agonists and long-acting 
anticholinergics are considered as the basic therapy for majority of patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). These combinations have 
different pharmacological characteristics and delivery devices that provides 
different clinical effects and new opportunities for personalized treatment of 
COPD. Aclidinium/formoterol fixed combination differs from other dual 
bronchodilators by twice-daily dosing regimen, good safety profile and a 
specific delivery system. Recent information on clinical efficacy and safety of 
aclidinium/formoterol combination in COPD patients is given in this article.

DOI: 10.26442/00403660.2019.03.000136
PMID: 31094464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Respir Med. 2020 Jan;161:105851. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.105851. Epub 2019 Nov 
28.

Impact of mild-to-moderate exacerbations on outcomes of neuromuscular electrical 
stimulation (NMES) in patients with COPD.

Meys R(1), Sillen MJ(2), Franssen FME(3), Stoffels AAF(4), Wouters EFM(3), van 
Hees HWH(5), van den Borst B(5), Klijn PH(6), Spruit MA(7); BASES-consortium.

Author information:
(1)Department of Research and Development, CIRO, Horn, the Netherlands. 
Electronic address: roymeys@ciro-horn.nl.
(2)Department of Physiotherapy, CIRO, Horn, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Research and Development, CIRO, Horn, the Netherlands; 
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre, NUTRIM 
School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, Maastricht, the 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Research and Development, CIRO, Horn, the Netherlands; 
Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud UMC Dekkerswald, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands; Department of Pulmonology, Merem Pulmonary Rehabilitation Centre, 
Hilversum, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud UMC Dekkerswald, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pulmonology, Merem Pulmonary Rehabilitation Centre, Hilversum, 
the Netherlands; Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Research and Development, CIRO, Horn, the Netherlands; 
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre, NUTRIM 
School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, Maastricht, the 
Netherlands; Reval Rehabilitation Research, Biomedical Research Institute, 
Faculty of Rehabilitation Sciences, Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium.

Acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) are common 
among patients attending pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) and may compromise its 
outcomes. Neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) seems one of the few 
exercise modalities that can actually be continued during AECOPD, due to its low 
burden on the impaired respiratory and cardiovascular system. However, the 
quality of evidence is low. The purpose of this study was to assess the impact 
of mild-to-moderate AECOPD on adherence/outcomes of a high-frequency (HF) or 
low-frequency (LF) NMES training program, as part of inpatient PR, in severely 
dyspneic, weakened individuals with COPD. 62 patients who received NMES as the 
sole supervised muscle training modality during an 8-week PR program (HF-NMES: 
n = 33; LF-NMES: n = 29) were analyzed retrospectively. 48.4% experienced ≥1 
AECOPD during PR and were classified as exacerbators. Exacerbators completed 75 
NMES sessions (interquartile range: 73-78) and were able to increase training 
intensity with 24 mA (15-39), while non-exacerbators completed 76 sessions 
(73-79) and increased training intensity with 35 mA (22-50), with no 
between-group differences (p = 0.474 and p = 0.065, respectively). The median 
change in 6-min walking distance, cycle endurance time, and isokinetic 
quadriceps strength and endurance did not differ between the exacerbation and 
non-exacerbation group. To conclude, the occurrence of mild-to-moderate AECOPD 
during a PR program primarily focused on NMES, does not affect adherence, 
intensity, and clinical outcomes in patients with severe COPD. Continuing NMES 
seems a feasible way to potentially counteract exacerbation-related lower-limb 
muscle dysfunction and improve outcomes of PR, with HF-NMES being the 
preferential muscle training modality.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.105851
PMID: 32056725

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest FMEF reports 
grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca, personal fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, personal fees from Chiesi, personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, grants 
and personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from TEVA, outside the submitted 
work; MAS reports grants from Lung Foundation Netherlands, during the conduct of 
the main study; EFMW reports grants from the Weijerhorst foundation Netherlands, 
during the conduct of the main study. RM, MJS, AAFS, HWHH, BB and PHK have 
nothing to disclose.


349. Respir Med. 2019 Feb;147:13-18. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.12.012. Epub 2019 Jan 
3.

Beyond inspiratory muscle strength: Clinical utility of single-breath work 
capacity assessment in veterans with COPD.

Formiga MF(1), Vital I(2), Urdaneta G(2), Campos MA(3), Cahalin LP(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Coral Gables, FL, United States; CAPES Foundation, Ministry of 
Education of Brazil, Brasilia, DF, Brazil. Electronic address: magno@miami.edu.
(2)Pulmonary Section, Miami Veterans Administration Medical Center, Miami, FL, 
United States.
(3)Pulmonary Section, Miami Veterans Administration Medical Center, Miami, FL, 
United States; Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States.
(4)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Coral Gables, FL, United States. Electronic address: 
l.cahalin@miami.edu.

BACKGROUND: Inspiratory muscle function in COPD has been traditionally described 
in terms of maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP). Arguably, however, is the 
day-to-day relevance of MIP, given that individuals rarely need maximal 
inspiratory forces to perform general tasks, but rather repeated breathing 
muscle contractions which demand endurance. The sustained maximal inspiratory 
pressure (SMIP) reflects the ability of the respiratory muscles to maintain 
force over time (i.e. single-breath work capacity). We investigated the 
relationships between SMIP and COPD-related clinical outcomes, hypothesizing 
that SMIP would have superior correlational and discriminatory value when 
compared to MIP.
METHODS: 61 males with mild-to-very severe airflow obstruction underwent 
measures of spirometry, whole-body plethysmography, symptomatology, comorbidity, 
quality of life, exacerbations and mental health. MIP and SMIP were obtained via 
the Test of Incremental Respiratory Endurance.
RESULTS: The mean ± SD MIP and SMIP were 77.2 ± 22.9 cmH2O and 407.9 ± 122.8 
PTU. Both MIP and SMIP positively correlated with pulmonary function, with SMIP 
displaying the highest correlations. We found significant differences in 
spirometry, hyperinflation, symptomatology, exacerbation frequency, comorbidity, 
quality of life and anxiety in subjects grouped as having reduced or normal 
single-breath work capacity. Finally, significantly lower SMIP values were found 
in individuals with an IC/TLC ratio ≤25%.
CONCLUSIONS: The assessment of SMIP appears to have superior clinical value than 
MIP in COPD. Our analyses revealed that subjects whose SMIP was reduced 
experienced more severe airflow obstruction, greater hyperinflation, as well as 
worse health and mental status with increased symptomatology and impaired 
quality of life.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.12.012
PMID: 30704693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Dan Med J. 2019 Jan;66(1):A5522.

A single administration of glucocorticoid increases exercise capacity in men 
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Karlsson SL(1), Backer V, Godtfredsen N.

Author information:
(1)nina.skavlan.godtfredsen@regionh.dk.

INTRODUCTION: Oral use of glucocorticoids is a well-described therapy in the 
treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Patients with COPD occasionally report subjective benefits of 
glucocorticoids in terms of fewer symptoms and better exercise performance, even 
when they do not experience exacerbation. This study investigated whether a 
single high therapeutic dose of oral glucocorticoid improves short-term exercise 
tolerance in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD.
METHODS: In a double-blinded crossover design, patients were randomised to 
either 100 mg of prednisolone or placebo. The study consisted of a baseline 
visit and two study visits, each seven days apart. The primary endpoint was time 
to exhaustion (TTE) on an ergometer bike using a submaximal exercise test on 70% 
of the maximal workload. On every study visit, spirometry, the COPD Assessment 
Test, maximal inspiratory/expiratory pressure and maximal voluntary contraction 
of the quadriceps muscle were measured. A total of 14 male patients with grade 
C/D COPD were randomised.
RESULTS: The mean TTE was significantly longer at the prednisolone visit (p = 
0.019), whereas no differences were seen on other parameters such as lung 
function, respiratory symptoms or muscle strength.
CONCLUSION: Our finding suggests that COPD patients experience improvements in 
exercise tolerance from a single high dose of glucocorticoid even in the stable 
phase of their disease.
FUNDING: none.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: EudraCT 2012-004503-13.

Articles published in the DMJ are “open access”. This means that the articles 
are distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 
Non-commercial License, which permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and 
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are 
credited.

PMID: 30573004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 May 29;14:1195-1207. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S182015. eCollection 2019.

Comparative analysis of medical expenditure with nebulized budesonide versus 
systemic corticosteroids in hospitalized patients with acute exacerbations of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in China.

Zhang J(1), Yao W(1), You X(2), Liu T(2), Liu Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, 
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Purpose: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by 
persistent respiratory symptoms and is a leading cause of disability in China. 
Acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD) are a leading cause of hospitalizations, 
and account for a substantial proportion of medical expenditure. Corticosteroids 
are commonly used to manage AECOPD in hospitalized patients, so our objective 
was to analyze the total medical expenditure associated with nebulized 
budesonide (nBUD) vs. systemic corticosteroids (SCS) in this population. 
Patients and methods: A post-hoc analysis was carried out in 1,577 and 973 
patients diagnosed with COPD who had received "any" nBUD or SCS regimen for 
AECOPD during hospitalization, respectively. Regimens included monotherapy, 
sequential therapy, and sequential-combination therapy. Comparative total 
medical expenditure was analyzed using a generalized linear model controlling 
for age, gender, comorbidities, smoking history, and respiratory failure or 
pneumonia on admission. Results: The total medical expenditure per capita with 
any nBUD or SCS regimen was CN¥11,814 (US$1,922) and CN¥12,153 (US$1,977), 
respectively. Any nBUD regimen was associated with a significant saving of 5.1% 
in expenditure compared with any SCS regimen (P=0.0341). Comorbidities, Type II 
respiratory failure, or pneumonia were patient factors associated with higher 
total medical expenditure (P<0.0001). In a subgroup analysis of the patients who 
received monotherapy, total medical expenditure was CN¥10,900 (US$1,773) for 
nBUD and CN¥11,581 (US$1,884) for SCS; nBUD was associated with a significant 
saving of 8.7% in expenditure compared with SCS (P=0.0013). Similarly, in 
patients with respiratory failure, treatment with any nBUD regimen was 
associated with a 10.6% saving in expenditure over any SCS regimen (P=0.0239); 
however, the same comparison was not significant in patients without respiratory 
failure (3.4%; P=0.2299). Conclusion: AECOPD is a leading cause of 
hospitalization in China, which places substantial burden on the healthcare 
system. This post-hoc analysis suggests that nBUD regimens are associated with 
lower medical expenditure than SCS regimens in hospitalized patients with 
AECOPD, and may reduce the financial burden of COPD. However, prospective 
studies evaluating the effectiveness of nBUD therapies are warranted.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S182015
PMCID: PMC6549719
PMID: 31213797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A proportion of results in this manuscript was 
presented at the 23rd International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes 
Research (ISPOR) Annual International Meeting as a poster presentation. The 
abstract was published in “Poster abstracts” in Value in Health 2018;21(Suppl 
1): S236 (available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2018.04.1598). XY, TL, 
and YL are employees of AstraZeneca, China. This study was supported by 
AstraZeneca, China. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


352. BMJ Open. 2019 May 5;9(5):e027935. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-027935.

Treatment of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: protocol for a 
systematic review and evidence map.

Dobler CC(1), Farah MH(1), Morrow AS(1), Alsawas M(1), Benkhadra R(1), Hasan 
B(1), Prokop LJ(2), Wang Z(1), Murad MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Evidence-Based Practice Center, Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for the 
Science of Health Care Delivery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Library Public Services, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive lung 
disease, usually caused by tobacco smoking, but other important risk factors 
include exposures to combustion products of biomass fuels and environmental 
pollution. The introduction of several new (combination) inhaler therapies, 
increasing uncertainty about the role of inhaled corticosteroids and a rapid 
proliferation of the literature on management of stable COPD in general, call 
for novel ways of evidence synthesis in this area. A systematic review and 
evidence map can provide the basis for shared decision-making tools and help to 
establish a future research agenda.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This systematic review will follow an umbrella systematic 
review design (also called overview of reviews). We plan to conduct a 
comprehensive literature search of Ovid MEDLINE (including epub ahead of print, 
in process and other non-indexed citations), Ovid Embase, Ovid Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews and Scopus from database inception to the present. We will 
include systematic reviews that assessed the effectiveness of any 
pharmacological or non-pharmacological intervention on one or more 
patient-important outcomes and/or lung function in patients with stable COPD. 
For every intervention/outcome pair, one systematic review will be included. An 
a priori protocol will guide, which systematic reviews will be chosen, how their 
credibility will be evaluated, and how the quality of the body of evidence will 
be rated. Data will be synthesised into an evidence map that will present a 
matrix that depicts each available treatment for stable COPD with a quantitative 
estimate on symptoms/outcomes from the patient perspective, along with an 
indication of the size and certainty in the evidence.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Approval by a research ethics committee is not 
required since the review will only include published data. The systematic 
review will be published in a peer-reviewed journal.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42018095079.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-027935
PMCID: PMC6501947
PMID: 31061055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


353. Respir Res. 2019 Jul 29;20(1):167. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1126-7.

Bone and ocular safety of budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered 
dose inhaler in COPD: a 52-week randomized study.

Kerwin EM(1), Ferguson GT(2), Mo M(3), DeAngelis K(4), Dorinsky P(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, 3860 Crater Lake Avenue, 
Medford, OR, 97504, USA. ekerwin@criresearch.com.
(2)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(3)Formerly of AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(4)AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Long-term use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) has been associated 
with increased risk of bone and ocular comorbidities. We evaluated the effects 
of the triple fixed-dose combination budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol 
fumarate metered dose inhaler (BGF MDI), formulated using co-suspension delivery 
technology, on bone mineral density (BMD) and ocular safety in patients with 
moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: In this extension study, a subset of patients from the 24-week, phase 
III, randomized, double-blind KRONOS study (NCT02497001) continued treatment 
(BGF MDI 320/18/9.6 μg, budesonide/formoterol fumarate [BFF] MDI 320/9.6 μg or 
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate [GFF] MDI 18/9.6 μg, as a non-steroidal 
comparator) for an additional 28 weeks. Primary endpoints were percentage change 
from baseline in lumbar spine BMD and change from baseline in lens opacities 
classification system III posterior subcapsular cataract (P) score, both at Week 
52. Adverse events were also assessed.
RESULTS: In total, 456 patients were included in the safety population (53.1% 
male, mean age 62.8 years). Changes from baseline in lumbar spine BMD (least 
squares mean [LSM] range - 0.12 to 0.38%) and P score (LSM range 0.02-0.15) were 
small for all treatments. Both BGF MDI and BFF MDI were non-inferior to GFF MDI 
using margins of -2% (BMD) and 0.5 units (P score). The incidence of 
treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs)  was generally similar among groups. 
Rates of confirmed pneumonia were low overall (2.4%) and highest in the GFF MDI 
group (3.4%), followed by BGF MDI (2.1%) and BFF MDI (1.1%). There were no 
cumulative adverse effects of treatment over time as the incidence and types of 
TEAEs, were generally similar in the first 24 weeks of the study and after Week 
24.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with COPD, both ICS-containing therapies were 
non-inferior to GFF MDI for the primary BMD and ophthalmological endpoints. 
Changes from baseline in all three treatment groups over 52 weeks were small and 
not clinically meaningful. All treatments were well tolerated with no new or 
unexpected safety findings.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02536508. Registered 27 August 2015.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1126-7
PMCID: PMC6664772
PMID: 31358008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EMK has served on advisory boards, speaker 
panels or received travel reimbursement from Amphastar, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Cipla, Forest, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, Novartis, Oriel, Pearl – a 
member of the AstraZeneca Group, Sunovion, Teva, and Theravance. He has 
conducted multicenter clinical trials for ~ 40 pharmaceutical companies. GTF 
reports grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from AstraZeneca during 
the conduct of the study; grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Pearl – a member of the AstraZeneca 
Group, and Sunovion; grants and personal fees from Theravance; and personal fees 
from Circassia, GlaxoSmithKline, Innoviva, Mylan, and Verona, outside the 
submitted work. MM, KDeA, and PD are employees of Pearl – a member of the 
AstraZeneca Group.


354. Respirology. 2019 Sep;24(9):889-898. doi: 10.1111/resp.13516. Epub 2019 Mar 5.

Rehabilitation in chronic respiratory diseases: In-hospital and 
post-exacerbation pulmonary rehabilitation.

Ibrahim W(1), Harvey-Dunstan TC(2), Greening NJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(2)Division of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation Sciences, School of Health 
Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(3)Centre for Exercise and Rehabilitation Science, Institute for Lung Health, 
Leicester, UK.

Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that require 
hospitalization are important events for patients. Functional impairment and 
skeletal muscle dysfunction can increase the risk of hospitalization and 
readmission, independent of lung function. In addition, once a patient is 
admitted, multiple factors can lead to worsening outcome including immobility, 
systemic inflammation and nutritional depletion. These non-pulmonary factors are 
potentially amenable to exercise therapy, as part of pulmonary rehabilitation 
(PR). Peri-exacerbation PR has an important role in the management of 
exacerbations of COPD. In this review, we explore how functional limitation and 
skeletal muscle dysfunction affect patients having a severe exacerbation of 
COPD, the systemic impact of hospitalization on patients including potential 
aetiologies and the role of PR around the time of an exacerbation. This includes 
rehabilitation during the inpatient phase, post-exacerbation rehabilitation and 
rehabilitation bridging hospital discharge. We also describe potential future 
developments in peri-exacerbation PR.

© 2019 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13516
PMID: 30835884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Korean J Radiol. 2019 Feb;20(2):304-312. doi: 10.3348/kjr.2018.0204.

Prediction of Treatment Response in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease by Determination of Airway Dimensions with Baseline Computed Tomography.

Park HJ(1), Lee SM(2), Choe J(1), Lee SM(1), Kim N(1), Lee JS(3), Oh YM(3), Seo 
JB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiology, University of 
Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiology, University of 
Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. 
sangmin.lee.md@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, and Clinical Research 
Center for Chronic Obstructive Airway Diseases, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the predictive factors for treatment responsiveness in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) at 1-year follow-up 
by performing quantitative analyses of baseline CT scans.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: COPD patients (n = 226; 212 men, 14 women) were recruited 
from the Korean Obstructive Lung Disease cohort. Patients received a combination 
of inhaled long-acting beta-agonists and corticosteroids twice daily for 3 
months and subsequently received medications according to the practicing 
clinician's decision. The emphysema index, air-trapping indices, and airway 
parameter (Pi10), calculated using both full-width-half-maximum and 
integral-based half-band (IBHB) methods, were obtained with baseline CT scans. 
Clinically meaningful treatment response was defined as an absolute increase of 
≥ 0.225 L in the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV₁) at the one-year 
follow-up. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to 
investigate the predictors of an increase in FEV₁, and receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed to evaluate the performance of the 
suggested models.
RESULTS: Treatment response was noted in 47 patients (20.8%). The mean FEV₁ 
increase in responders was 0.36 ± 0.10 L. On univariate analysis, the 
air-trapping index (ATI) obtained by the subtraction method, ATI of the 
emphysematous area, and IBHB-measured Pi10 parameter differed significantly 
between treatment responders and non-responders (p = 0.048, 0.042, and 0.002, 
respectively). Multivariate analysis revealed that the IBHB-measured Pi10 was 
the only independent variable predictive of an FEV₁ increase (p = 0.003). The 
adjusted odds ratio was 1.787 (95% confidence interval: 1.220-2.619). The area 
under the ROC curve was 0.641.
CONCLUSION: Measurement of standardized airway dimensions on baseline CT by 
using a recently validated quantification method can predict treatment 
responsiveness in COPD patients.

Copyright © 2019 The Korean Society of Radiology.

DOI: 10.3348/kjr.2018.0204
PMCID: PMC6342755
PMID: 30672170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflicts of 
interest.


356. Zhonghua Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue. 2019 Feb;31(2):236-237. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.2095-4352.2019.02.023.

[Design and application of a pulmonary function exercise bottle].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu H(1), Zhang X, Zhang Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Intensive Care Unit, the Eighth Medical Center of the 
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100091, China. Corresponding author: Zhang 
Xiaolin, Email: luckylin77@163.com.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a severe respiratory disease 
characterized by airway obstruction with high mortality and rate of recurrence. 
Rehabilitation exercise can lessen the possibility of the progressive 
exacerbation of the patient's condition, exerting an active role in improving 
their lung function and the quality of the patients' life. Therefore, we have 
designed a lung function exercise bottle, which is capable of adjusting the 
pressure according to the patient's needs. It is easy to operate and apply in 
practice. The exercise bottle is composed of three components, including bottle 
body, threaded round cap and air blow pipe. The bottle body is formed in 
rectangle shape, and utilized to contain liquid. The filling opening is designed 
on the top of the bottle. Outside of the filling opening, there is a screw 
thread round cap, which can adjust the pressure according to the patient's 
tolerance, gradually increasing the training intensity,and improving the 
training effect thereby. The blowpipe can be inserted into the bottle body and 
the patient can blow the air through the tube. Compared with the traditional 
rehabilitation training, when the newly invented lung function exercise bottle 
has been used for rehabilitation exercise, the air pressure in the bottle can be 
adjusted, with the advantage of wider range of application, lower cost and more 
convenient. It provides a good solution for clinical and home-based 
rehabilitation and is worth of popularizing.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.2095-4352.2019.02.023
PMID: 30827317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. PLoS One. 2020 Feb 27;15(2):e0229257. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229257. 
eCollection 2020.

Social and clinical predictors of short- and long-term readmission after a 
severe exacerbation of copd.

Fernández-García S(1)(2), Represas-Represas C(1)(2), Ruano-Raviña A(3)(4), 
Mouronte-Roibás C(1)(2), Botana-Rial M(1)(2), Ramos-Hernández C(1)(2), 
Fernández-Villar A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pneumonology, University Hospital Complex of Vigo, Pontevedra, 
Spain.
(2)Neumo Vigo I +i. Institute of Health Research Galicia Sur (IISGS, Instituto 
de Investigación Sanitaria Galicia Sur), Vigo, Pontevedra, Spain.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, University of Santiago 
de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(4)Consortium for Biomedical Research in Epidemiology and Public Health 
(CIBERESP, Consorcio de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Epidemiología y Salud 
Pública), Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
predictive ability of multiple social, and clinical factors for readmission 
after a severe acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) during various time periods.
METHODS: We performed a prospective cohort study in which recruited patients 
with AECOPD. We systematically collected numerous clinical (symptoms, pulmonary 
function, comorbidities, and treatment) and social (financial situation, housing 
situation, family support, caregiver overload, ability to perform activities, 
and risk of social exclusion) variables using several questionnaires and 
indices. The patients were followed closely for one year and readmissions at 30, 
60, and 365 days were analysed.
RESULTS: 253 patients were included, aged 68.9±9.8years, FEV1 = 42.1%±14.2%, and 
a Charlson's index = 1.8±0.9. Of these patients, 20.2%, 39.6%, and 63.7% were 
readmitted within the first 30, 90, and 365 days after discharge, respectively. 
In the multivariate model applied, the variables that were independently 
associated with readmission over all three periods of the analysis were 
dependence to perform basic activities of daily living (BADLs) (odds ratio [OR] 
= 2.10-4.10) and a history of two or more admissions within the previous year 
(OR = 2.78-3.78). At 90 days, a history of bacterial isolates in a previous 
sputum culture (OR = 2.39) and at 365 days, a high grade of dyspnoea (OR = 2.51) 
and obesity (OR = 2.38) were also identified as predictors of hospital 
readmission.
CONCLUSIONS: The patients' limitation to perform BADLs and their history of 
admissions for AECOPD were the best predictive variables for the likelihood of 
readmission when adjusted for many other social and clinical variables, 
regardless of the time period considered for such prediction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229257
PMCID: PMC7046279
PMID: 32106226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.


358. Lung. 2019 Jun;197(3):303-313. doi: 10.1007/s00408-019-00208-5. Epub 2019 Mar 
11.

The Economic Effect of Early Management in Patients with Early Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Results from a Population-Based Nationwide 
Survey.

Lee YS(1), Min KH(1), Rhee CK(2), Kim YH(3), Lim SY(4), Um SJ(5), Lee CH(6), 
Jung KS(7), Yoo KH(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Korea University Medical Center, Guro Hospital, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Bucheon St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Dong-A 
University College of Medicine, Dong-A University Medical Center, Busan, 
Republic of Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University, Hallym University College of 
Medicine, Anyang, Republic of Korea.
(8)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Konkuk University School of Medicine, 120 Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, 
05029, Seoul, Republic of Korea. khyou@kuh.ac.kr.

PURPOSE: The economic effect of regular follow-up and early management in 
patients with early chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has not yet 
been clarified. Therefore, this study aimed to estimate the economic effect of 
regular follow-up and early management in these patients.
METHODS: Patients with early COPD were identified from the Korea National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey. We analyzed medical utilization and cost for 
2 years without any missing data by using the Korean National Health Insurance 
data. Patients with routine healthcare maintenance were defined as, after 
diagnosis, those with regular visits to the hospital and receiving early 
management of COPD.
RESULTS: Among 1204 patients with early COPD, the patients who were classified 
as the group with routine healthcare maintenance (69/146; 47.3%) and the group 
with intermittent healthcare user (79/1058; 7.5%) visited to hospital for the 
next 2 years. The patients with routine healthcare maintenance had lower cost of 
inpatient service and frequencies of emergency room (ER) visit and intensive 
care unit (ICU) admission than intermittent healthcare users (cost of inpatient 
service, $4595 vs. $4953 per person; ER visit, 7.2 vs. 11.5; ICU admission, 4.3 
vs. 7.7). Even in patients with COPD and FEV1 ≥ 80, early intervention through 
follow-up reduced the cost of inpatient service because these patients could 
have had less severe acute exacerbations than intermittent healthcare users.
CONCLUSION: Patients with early COPD, even those with FEV1 ≥ 80, need regular 
follow-up for early management and disease control as well as for reducing the 
socioeconomic burden of the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-019-00208-5
PMID: 30859313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Comp Eff Res. 2019 Nov;8(15):1299-1316. doi: 10.2217/cer-2019-0101. Epub 2019 
Sep 27.

Costs, exacerbations and pneumonia after initiating combination tiotropium 
olodaterol versus triple therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Palli SR(1), Buikema AR(2), DuCharme M(2), Frazer M(2), Kaila S(1), Juday T(1).

Author information:
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Ridgefield, CT 06877, USA.
(2)Optum, Inc. Eden Prairie, MN 55344, USA.

Aim: To compare health plan-paid costs, exacerbations and pneumonia outcomes for 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) initiating 
combination tiotropium olodaterol (TIO + OLO) versus triple therapy (TT: 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist + long-acting β2 agonists + inhaled 
corticosteroid). Patients & methods: COPD patients initiating TIO + OLO or TT 
between 1 January 2014 and 30 June 2016 were identified from a managed care 
Medicare database and balanced for baseline characteristics using inverse 
probability of treatment weighting before assessment of outcomes. Results: 
Annual COPD-related and all-cause costs were US$4118 (35%) and US$5384 (23%) 
lower for TIO + OLO versus TT (both p ≤ 0.001). TIO + OLO patients had nearly 
half the severe exacerbations (8.3 vs 15.5%; p = 0.014) and pneumonia was also 
less common (18.9 vs 30.9%; p < 0.001). Conclusion: TIO + OLO was associated 
with improved economic and COPD health outcomes versus TT.

DOI: 10.2217/cer-2019-0101
PMID: 31559852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Aug;57:101808. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101808. Epub 
2019 May 30.

Cardiovascular safety of revefenacin, a once-daily, lung-selective, long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist for nebulized therapy of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: Evaluation in phase 3 clinical trials.

Donohue JF(1), Feldman G(2), Sethi S(3), Barnes CN(4), Pendyala S(5), Bourdet 
D(6), Crater G(7).

Author information:
(1)UNC School of Medicine, 130 Mason Farm Road, Chapel Hill, NC, 27514, USA. 
Electronic address: jdonohue@med.unc.edu.
(2)South Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, 151 Harold Fleming Court, 
Spartanburg, SC, 29303, USA. Electronic address: gfeld3232@aol.com.
(3)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, 3495 Bailey Avenue, 
Buffalo, NY, 14215, USA. Electronic address: ssethi@buffalo.edu.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, 901 Gateway Boulevard, 
CA, 94080, USA. Electronic address: CBarnes@theravance.com.
(5)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, 901 Gateway Boulevard, 
CA, 94080, USA. Electronic address: SPendyala@theravance.com.
(6)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, 901 Gateway Boulevard, 
CA, 94080, USA. Electronic address: DBourdet@theravance.com.
(7)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, 901 Gateway Boulevard, 
CA, 94080, USA. Electronic address: gcrater@theravance.com.

The cardiovascular safety of revefenacin, an anticholinergic indicated for the 
maintenance treatment of patients with chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD), 
was evaluated in phase 3 trials in patients with moderate to very severe COPD. 
No clinically meaningful changes in 12-lead electrocardiogram recordings were 
observed with up to 52 weeks of once-daily revefenacin 88 or 175 μg. In a pooled 
analysis of Studies 0126 and 0127, the incidence of prolonged QT interval 
corrected for heart rate using the Fridericia correction formula (QTcF; >450 
msec) for revefenacin 88 μg (n = 23, 5.6%) and revefenacin 175 μg (n = 23, 5.9%) 
was similar to that for placebo (n = 22, 5.3%). In Study 0128, the incidence of 
prolonged QTcF was similar in the revefenacin 175 μg (n = 25, 7.7%) and 
tiotropium (n = 26, 7.3%) groups and lower in the revefenacin 88 μg (n = 15, 
4.2%) group. There were four major adverse cardiac events (MACEs) in Study 0126 
(one, two, and one in the placebo, revefenacin 88 μg, and revefenacin 175 μg 
groups, respectively), no MACEs in Study 0127 and 26 MACEs in Study 0128 (9, 10 
and 7 in the revefenacin 88 μg, revefenacin 175 μg and tiotropium groups, 
respectively). In Study 0128, only one MACE was considered possibly/probably 
related to revefenacin (atrial fibrillation in the revefenacin 175 μg group). 
Thus, revefenacin may provide beneficial nebulized therapy for patients with 
COPD without further elevating their risk of cardiovascular events.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101808
PMID: 31152911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Arkh Patol. 2019;81(3):19-26. doi: 10.17116/patol20198103119.

[Morphofunctional features of the cerebral cortex in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease concurrent with ischemic stroke].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Plekhova NG(1), Geltser BI(2), Zinovyev SV(1), Zayats YV(2).

Author information:
(1)Pacific State Medical University, Ministry of Health of Russia, Vladivostok, 
Russia.
(2)Far Eastern Federal University, Ministry of Education and Science of the 
Russia, Vladivostok, Russia.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the structural changes in the cerebral cortex tissues, 
which are characteristic of the severe course of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) and ischemic cerebral stroke (ICS).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The autopsy material of the microcirculatory bed of the 
cerebral cortex from 18 people aged 48-64 years who had died from COPD, ICS, and 
a concurrence of these conditions underwent histological examination and 
morphometric analysis.
RESULTS: The state of the brain from the persons who died from ICS was 
characterized by a decline in the total number of neurons and glial elements, by 
structural and regional blood flow changes with obvious venous hyperemia, 
stasis, and red blood cell aggregation in the vessels. There was pericellular 
and perivascular edema in the perifocal area of the brain from people who died 
from COPD, as well as morphological signs of cerebral hemodynamic disorders. The 
brain structural features in ICS concurrent with COPD included a double decrease 
in the numerical density of capillaries, their hyperemia, perivascular edema, 
and venous plethora, a substantial change in the diameter of non-muscular 
venules, parenchymal atrophy, and stromal sclerosis, indicating the presence of 
a chronic process.
CONCLUSION: Patients with ICS in the presence of COPD versus those who died from 
the isolated variants of these conditions were recorded to have an obvious 
decrease in the numerical density of capillaries, their hyperemia, and a 
pronounced change in the structure of the cerebral vein wall, which is a 
consequence of multisystem processes associated with COPD.

Publisher: Цель исследования - определить изменения в структуре ткани коры 
больших полушарий, характерные для тяжелого течения хронической обструктивной 
болезни легких (ХОБЛ) и ишемического инсульта (ИИ) головного мозга. Материал и 
методы. Проведены гистологическое исследование и морфометрический анализ 
микроциркуляторного русла коры больших полушарий аутопсийного материала от 18 
умерших в возрасте 48-64 лет вследствие ХОБЛ, ИИ и при сочетании указанных 
патологий. Результаты. Состояние головного мозга лиц, умерших вследствие ИИ, 
характеризовалось снижением общего количества нейронов и глиальных элементов, 
изменением структуры регионарного кровотока с выраженной венозной гиперемией, 
стазом и агрегацией эритроцитов в сосудах. В перифокальной зоне мозга умерших от 
ХОБЛ наблюдался перицеллюлярный и периваскулярный отек, а также отмечались 
морфологические признаки нарушения церебральной гемодинамики. К структурным 
особенностям состояния головного мозга при сочетании ИИ и ХОБЛ относились 
двукратное снижение численной плотности капилляров, их гиперемия, 
периваскулярный отек и полнокровие вен, существенное изменение диаметра венул 
безмышечного типа, атрофия паренхимы и склероз стромы, что указывало на наличие 
хронического процесса. Выводы. При ИИ у больных ХОБЛ по сравнению с умершими от 
'изолированных' вариантов этих патологий зафиксированы значимое снижение 
численной плотности капилляров, их гиперемия, выраженное изменение строения 
стенки вен головного мозга, что является следствием мультисистемных процессов, 
ассоциированных с ХОБЛ.

DOI: 10.17116/patol20198103119
PMID: 31317927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. COPD. 2019 Aug;16(3-4):215-226. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1659760. Epub 2019 
Sep 9.

Clinical and Functional Characteristics of COPD Patients Across GOLD 
Classifications: Results of a Multicenter Observational Study.

Radovanovic D(1), Contoli M(2), Marco FD(3), Sotgiu G(4), Pelaia G(5), Braido 
F(6), Corsico AG(7), Micheletto C(8), Rogliani P(9)(10), Scichilone N(11), 
Saderi L(4), Santus P(1), Solidoro P(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (DIBIC), Università Degli 
Studi di Milano, Division of Pulmonary Diseases, Ospedale L. Sacco, ASST 
Fatebenfratelli-Sacco , Milan , Italy.
(2)Section of Internal and Cardiorespiratory Medicine, Department of Medical 
Sciences, University of Ferrara , Ferrara , Italy.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, Università Degli Studi di Milano, Respiratory 
Unit, ASST, Ospedale Papa Giovanni XXIII , Bergamo , Italy.
(4)Clinical Epidemiology and Medical Statistics Unit, Department of Medical, 
Surgical and Experimental Medicine, University of Sassari , Sassari , Italy.
(5)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Section of Respiratory Diseases, 
Magna Graecia University of Catanzaro , Catanzaro , Italy.
(6)Respiratory Disease and Allergy Clinic, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Ospedale Policlinico IRCCS San Martino di Genova , Italy.
(7)Division of Respiratory Diseases, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, 
Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Pavia , Pavia , 
Italy.
(8)UOC Pneumologia, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata , Verona , 
Italy.
(9)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, School of Respiratory 
Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata , Rome , Italy.
(10)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome Tor 
Vergata , Rome , Italy.
(11)Department of Biomedicine and Internal and Specialistic Medicine, University 
of Palermo , Palermo , Italy.
(12)Cardiovascular and Thoracic Department, SC Pneumologia U, Città Della Salute 
e Della Scienza (Molinette) University Hospital , Turin , Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a heterogeneous disease. The 
severity grading systems proposed by the Global initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) have changed over time. The aim of the study was 
to evaluate if the different GOLD classifications can capture the complexity of 
the disease by investigating the distribution of lung function and clinical 
parameters across the GOLD classification systems. This was an observational, 
retrospective, multicentre study. COPD patients were stratified according to the 
GOLD severity grading proposed in the 2007, and to the ABCD assessment tool 
present in the 2011, and 2017 versions of the initiative. Data from body 
plethysmography, DLCO, comorbidities, exacerbation history, pharmacological 
therapy and eosinophil counts were collected. A total of 1360 patients (73.4% 
males) were included in the analysis. Overall, 37% of the patients were 
severe-very severe according to GOLD 2007. Compared with GOLD 2011, applying the 
GOLD 2017 criteria, the proportion of the at risk categories (C and D) was 
reduced by ∼23%. Impairment in inspiratory capacity, DLCO and the prevalence of 
emphysema paralleled the GOLD 2007 classification only. The proportion of 
patients with ≥ 200 eosinophils/µL was higher in GOLD 2007 stages 3-4 compared 
with stages 1-2 (P = 0.008). Eosinophil levels were similar across risk classes 
in GOLD 2011 and 2017. Overall, 41.8% and 52.4% of the patients in the low risk 
groups according to GOLD 2011 and 2017 were exposed to inhaled corticosteroids. 
The GOLD 2011 and 2017 classifications, despite exploring symptoms and 
exacerbations, might miss other relevant patients' clinical characteristics such 
as lung function and phenotypes, which have a significant impact on outcomes and 
disease severity.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1659760
PMID: 31500459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Respir Res. 2019 Oct 29;20(1):237. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1208-6.

Treatment failure and hospital readmissions in severe COPD exacerbations treated 
with azithromycin versus placebo - a post-hoc analysis of the BACE randomized 
controlled trial.

Vermeersch K(1)(2), Belmans A(3)(4), Bogaerts K(3)(4), Gyselinck I(1), 
Cardinaels N(1), Gabrovska M(5), Aumann J(6), Demedts IK(7), Corhay JL(8), 
Marchand E(9)(10), Slabbynck H(11), Haenebalcke C(12), Vermeersch S(13), 
Verleden GM(1)(2), Troosters T(1)(14), Ninane V(5), Brusselle GG(13), Janssens 
W(15)(16); BACE trial investigators.

Collaborators: Ninane V, Aumann J, Demedts IK, Slabbynck H, Marchand E, 
Haenebalcke C, Peché R, Brusselle GG, Vincken W, Corhay JL, Haerens M, Fremault 
A, Lauwerier T, Debrock A, Lamont J, Tits G, Jordens P, Delobbe A, Martinot JB.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Chronic Diseases, 
Metabolism and Ageing, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, O&NI, box 706, B-3000, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(2)Department of Respiratory Diseases, University Hospitals Leuven, B-3000, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(3)I-BioStat, KU Leuven, B-3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Universiteit Hasselt, B-3500, Hasselt, Belgium.
(5)Department of Pneumology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Saint-Pierre, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles, B-1000, Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Department of Pneumology, Jessa Ziekenhuis, B-3500, Hasselt, Belgium.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, AZ Delta Roeselare-Menen, B-8800, 
Roeselare, Belgium.
(8)Department of Pneumology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, site Sart-Tilman, 
B-4000, Liège, Belgium.
(9)Department of Pneumology, CHU-UCL-Namur, site Mont-Godinne, B-5530, Yvoir, 
Belgium.
(10)Faculty of Medicine, NARILIS, Laboratory of Respiratory Physiology, 
University of Namur, B-5000, Namur, Belgium.
(11)Department of Respiratory Medicine, ZNA Middelheim, B-2020, Antwerpen, 
Belgium.
(12)Department of Pneumology, AZ Sint-Jan, B-8000, Brugge-Oostende, Belgium.
(13)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, B-9000, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(14)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, Faculty of Kinesiology and 
Rehabilitation Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(15)Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Chronic Diseases, 
Metabolism and Ageing, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, O&NI, box 706, B-3000, Leuven, 
Belgium. wim.janssens@kuleuven.be.
(16)Department of Respiratory Diseases, University Hospitals Leuven, B-3000, 
Leuven, Belgium. wim.janssens@kuleuven.be.

BACKGROUND: In the BACE trial, a 3-month (3 m) intervention with azithromycin, 
initiated at the onset of an infectious COPD exacerbation requiring 
hospitalization, decreased the rate of a first treatment failure (TF); the 
composite of treatment intensification (TI), step-up in hospital care (SH) and 
mortality.
OBJECTIVES: (1) To investigate the intervention's effect on recurrent events, 
and (2) to identify clinical subgroups most likely to benefit, determined from 
the incidence rate of TF and hospital readmissions.
METHODS: Enrolment criteria included the diagnosis of COPD, a smoking history of 
≥10 pack-years and ≥ 1 exacerbation in the previous year. Rate ratio (RR) 
calculations, subgroup analyses and modelling of continuous variables using 
splines were based on a Poisson regression model, adjusted for exposure time.
RESULTS: Azithromycin significantly reduced TF by 24% within 3 m (RR = 0.76, 
95%CI:0.59;0.97, p = 0.031) through a 50% reduction in SH (RR = 0.50, 
95%CI:0.30;0.81, p = 0.006), which comprised of a 53% reduction in hospital 
readmissions (RR = 0.47, 95%CI:0.27;0.80; p = 0.007). A significant interaction 
between the intervention, CRP and blood eosinophil count at hospital admission 
was found, with azithromycin significantly reducing hospital readmissions in 
patients with high CRP (> 50 mg/L, RR = 0.18, 95%CI:0.05;0.60, p = 0.005), or 
low blood eosinophil count (<300cells/μL, RR = 0.33, 95%CI:0.17;0.64, 
p = 0.001). No differences were observed in treatment response by age, FEV1, CRP 
or blood eosinophil count in continuous analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: This post-hoc analysis of the BACE trial shows that azithromycin 
initiated at the onset of an infectious COPD exacerbation requiring 
hospitalization reduces the incidence rate of TF within 3 m by preventing 
hospital readmissions. In patients with high CRP or low blood eosinophil count 
at admission this treatment effect was more pronounced, suggesting a potential 
role for these biomarkers in guiding azithromycin therapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov number. NCT02135354 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1208-6
PMCID: PMC6819655
PMID: 31665017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: -KV is supported as a doctoral candidate by the 
Flemish Government Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology (Belgium). 
-AB’s institute received consultancy fees from Boehringer-Ingelheim and UCB 
Pharma. -KB’s institute received consultancy fees from Boehringer-Ingelheim and 
UCB Pharma. -IG has nothing to disclose. -NC has nothing to disclose. -MG has 
nothing to disclose. -JA has nothing to disclose. -IKD has nothing to disclose. 
-JLC has received speaker and consultancy fees from Boehringer-Ingelheim, 
AstraZeneca, Novartis, Chiesi and GlaxoSmithKline. -EM has, within the last 
5 years, received honoraria for lectures from Boehringer-Ingelheim, Chiesi and 
Novartis; he is a member of advisory boards for AstraZeneca, Chiesi, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim and Novartis. -HS has received consultancy fees from 
Boehringer-Ingelheim and GlaxoSmithKline. -CH has received speaker and 
consultancy fees from Boehringer-Ingelheim, Chiesi, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline 
and Novartis. -SV has nothing to disclose. -GMV has nothing to disclose. -TT is 
vice president of the European Respiratory Society (2018–2019). His institute 
received speaker and consultancy fees from Boehringer-Ingelheim, AstraZeneca and 
Chiesi. -VN has received speaker and consultancy fees from Boehringer-Ingelheim, 
AstraZeneca, Novartis, MSD, GlaxoSmithKline and Chiesi. -GB has, within the last 
5 years, received honoraria for lectures from AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Pfizer, Teva, UCB Pharma and Zambon; he is a 
member of advisory boards for AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Sanofi/Regeneron and Teva. -WJ is supported as a 
senior clinical researcher by the Fund for Scientific Research Flanders 
(Belgium); and has received research funding, speaker and consultancy fees from 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Chiesi and GlaxoSmithKline. WJ is 
co-founder of ArtIQ.


364. Respir Res. 2019 Aug 2;20(1):173. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1127-6.

Can medicines development improve outcomes in asthma and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease management by driving effectiveness?

Leather DA(1), Yates L(2), Svedsater H(3), Jacques L(4), Collier S(5), Powell 
D(2), Jones R(6).

Author information:
(1)Global Respiratory Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Brentford, Middlesex, UK. 
david.a.leather@gsk.com.
(2)Global Respiratory Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(3)Value Evidence & Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(4)Clinical Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(5)UK Medical, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(6)Community and Primary Health Care, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Plymouth University, Plymouth, UK.

Despite the availability of treatment guidelines and inhaled medications for 
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), much remains to be done 
to lessen the burden of these respiratory diseases for patients. The challenge 
of selecting effective and efficacious drugs for patients is a key focus area 
for healthcare professionals. Here we discuss the concept of "drivers of 
effectiveness"- features of a medicine which may increase or decrease its 
effectiveness in the presence of real-world factors - and highlight the 
importance of considering these drivers in the early stages of drug development, 
and exploring their impact in carefully designed pragmatic trials. Using the 
Salford Lung Studies (SLS) in asthma and COPD as an illustrative example, we 
discuss various features of the inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist 
combination, fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI), as potential drivers of 
effectiveness that may have contributed to the improved patient outcomes 
observed with initiation of FF/VI versus continuation of usual care in the UK 
primary care setting.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1127-6
PMCID: PMC6679431
PMID: 31375102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DAL, LY, HS, LJ, SC, and DP disclose employment 
with, and stock/share ownership in, GlaxoSmithKline plc. RJ has received grants 
from AstraZeneca and GlaxoSmithKline plc., and personal fees from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Novartis, Nutricia and 
Pfizer outside the submitted work.


365. Turk J Med Sci. 2019 Feb 11;49(1):93-100. doi: 10.3906/sag-1807-106.

8-Hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine as a biomarker of oxidative stress in acute 
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Lıu X, Deng K, Chen S, Zhang Y, Yao J, Weng X, Zhang Y, Gao T, Feng G.

BACKGROUND/AIM: 8-Hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) is a biomarker of oxidative 
stress and has been implicated in many diseases. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the clinical value of plasma 8-OHdG level in patients with acute 
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 154 subjects were enrolled in this study, 
including 20 healthy volunteers, 24 COPD patients in the stable phase, and 110 
AECOPD patients. Peripheral blood samples, demographic information, and clinical 
characteristics were collected from all subjects at the time of being recruited 
into the study. Plasma 8-OHdG level was detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
a ss ay.
RESULTS: 8-OHdG was increased in patients with AECOPD compared to healthy 
subjects and patients with stable COPD, especially in smokers. It also increased 
with the GOLD stage, mMRC grade, CAT score, and group level of combined COPD 
assessment. Additionally, further analysis revealed that 8-OHdG was negatively 
correlated with FEV1, FEV1% predicted, and FEV1/FVC and positively correlated 
with C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, and neutrophil CD64.
CONCLUSION: 8-OHdG is associated with spirometric severity, symptomatic 
severity, exacerbation risk, and inflammatory biomarkers in AECOPD patients, 
suggesting it as a promising biomarker for reflecting disease severity and 
guiding the choice of optimal therapeutic decision.

DOI: 10.3906/sag-1807-106
PMID: 30762093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Respirology. 2019 Aug;24(8):765-776. doi: 10.1111/resp.13538. Epub 2019 Mar 21.

Risk stratification for short-term mortality at hospital admission for acute 
exacerbations of COPD.

Sprooten RTM(1), Rohde GGU(2), Lawyer G(3), Leijte WT(1), Wouters EFM(1)(4), 
Franssen FME(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Center, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Pneumologie/Allergologie, Medizinische Klinik 1, Klinikum der Johann Wolfgang 
Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Machine Learning Solutions, Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
(4)Ciro+, Centre of Expertise for Chronic Organ Failure, Horn, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Respirology. 2019 Aug;24(8):716-717.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(ECOPD) are associated with increased in-hospital and short-term mortality. 
Developing an easy-to-use model to predict adverse outcomes will be useful in 
daily clinical practice and will facilitate management decisions. We aimed to 
assess mortality rates and potential predictors for short-term mortality after 
severe ECOPD. Classification and Regression Tree (CART) model was used to 
identify predictors of adverse outcome.
METHODS: A retrospective observational cohort study, including all patients 
admitted to Maastricht University Medical Center with ECOPD between June 2011 
and December 2014 was performed. The last admission was taken into account, and 
its demographic, clinical and biochemical data were recorded.
RESULTS: A total of 364 hospitalized patients were enrolled. Mean (SD) age was 
70.5 (10.2) years, 54.4% were male and mean FEV1 45.2% (17.7) of predicted. The 
in-hospital and 90-day mortality were, respectively, 8.5 and 16.2%. Independent 
risk factors for 90-day mortality were: PaC02 (odds ratio (OR): 1.31; 95% 
confidence interval (CI): 1.00-0.35), age (OR: 1.09; CI: 0.06-0.11), body mass 
index (BMI) < 18.5 kg/m2 (OR: 2.72; 95% CI: 0.53-1.47) and previous admission 
for ECOPD in last 2 years (OR: 1.29; 95% CI: -0.14, -0.65). The CART model 
selected PaCO2  ≥ 9.1 kPa, age > 80 years, BMI < 18.5 kg/m2 and previous 
admission for ECOPD as the most discriminatory factors.
CONCLUSION: According CART analysis, high PaCO2 and age, low BMI and previous 
admission for ECOPD in last 2 years were the strongest predictors of 90-day 
mortality in patients with severe ECOPD. In absence of any of these factors, no 
patients died, suggesting that this model indeed enables risk stratification.

© 2019 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13538
PMID: 30897284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Apr 16;15:775-786. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S238408. eCollection 2020.

Patient Characteristics and Healthcare Resource Utilization Among Patients with 
COPD New to LAMA/LABA Fixed-Dose Combination Treatment in US-Based Real-World 
Practice.

Ding B(1), Kallenbach L(2), Slipski L(2), Wilk A(2), O'Brien D(2), Guranlioglu 
D(3).

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Practice Fusion, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.

INTRODUCTION: This retrospective, observational cohort study utilized an 
integrated dataset from an electronic health records system and a claims 
database to describe demographic and clinical characteristics, healthcare 
resource utilization (HCRU), and treatment patterns in COPD patients initiating 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)/long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) 
fixed-dose combination (FDC) treatment in the USA.
METHODS: Patients were aged ≥40 years and had a COPD diagnosis (Practice Fusion 
system) and ≥1 prescription of LAMA/LABA FDC therapy, with an index date (first 
prescription) 1 May 2014-31 December 2017. For the HCRU analysis, patients had 
≥2 claims from the Symphony Health database within 12 months before index. All 
analyses of outcomes relating to demographic and clinical characteristics, HCRU, 
and treatment patterns were descriptive.
RESULTS: Patients initiating LAMA/LABA FDCs (n=8224) had a mean age of 67.9 
years, 52.8% were female, and mean BMI was 29.2 kg/m2. The most common 
comorbidities were cardiovascular disease (74.3%), hypertension (64.0%), and 
hyperlipidemia (45.6%). In the 12 months prior to index, 53.1% of patients had 
used inhaled therapy: 23.4% short-acting therapy only, 16.7% short-acting and 
maintenance therapy, and 13.1% maintenance therapy only. Amongst users of 
inhaled therapies, the pMDI was the most frequently used device (64.3%, 
n=2812/4370). Of 7050 patients included in the HCRU analysis, 79.8% had 
COPD-related costs; mean cost/patient was $4174. Mean COPD-related costs per 
patient for moderate and severe exacerbations were $910 and $23,208, 
respectively. Per-patient costs included $23,032 for inpatient visits, $2358 for 
emergency visits, $4432 for outpatient visits, and $1989 for pharmacy claims.
CONCLUSION: This observational study is the first to describe the real-world 
demographic and clinical characteristics and HCRU of patients initiating 
LAMA/LABA FDC treatment in the USA. Patients were generally elderly and 
overweight, with comorbidities of CVD, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. 
Inpatient visits were the largest contributor to COPD-related costs per patient 
in the year prior to initiation of LAMA/LABA FDCs.

© 2020 Ding et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S238408
PMCID: PMC7169942
PMID: 32346288

Conflict of interest statement: BD and DG are employees of AstraZeneca. DG holds 
AstraZeneca stock and/or stock options. LK, LS, AW, and DO are employees of 
Practice Fusion. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


368. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;13:1753466619885522. doi: 
10.1177/1753466619885522.

Triple therapy for COPD: a crude analysis from a systematic review of the 
evidence.

Lopez-Campos JL(1)(2), Carrasco-Hernandez L(3)(4), Quintana-Gallego E(3)(4), 
Calero-Acuña C(3)(4), Márquez-Martín E(3)(4), Ortega-Ruiz F(3)(4), Soriano 
JB(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Unidad Médico-Quirúrgica de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/Universidad 
de Sevilla, Avda. Manuel Siurot, s/n., Seville, 41013, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias 
(CIBERES). Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(3)IBiS, Unidad Médico-Quirúrgica de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Hospital 
Universitario Virgen del Rocío/Universidad de Sevilla, Spain.
(4)CIBERES, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Hospital Universitario de la Princesa (IISP), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 
Madrid, España.

We systematically reviewed the current knowledge on fixed-dose triple therapies 
for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), with a 
specific focus on its efficacy versus single bronchodilation, double fixed dose 
combinations, and open triple therapies. Articles were retrieved from PubMed, 
Embase, and Scopus up to 3 August 2018. We selected articles with randomized 
controlled or crossover design conducted in patients with COPD and published as 
full-length articles or scientific letters, evaluating triple therapy 
combinations in a single or different inhaler, and with efficacy data versus 
monocomponents, double combinations, or open triple therapies. Our systematic 
search reported 108 articles, of which 24 trials were finally selected for the 
analysis. A total of 7 studies with fixed dose triple therapy combinations, and 
17 studies with open triple therapies combinations. Triple therapy showed 
improvements in lung function [trough forced expiratory volume (FEV1) ranging 
from not significant (NS) to 147 ml], health status using the St. George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire [(SGRQ) from NS to 8.8 points], and exacerbations 
[risk ratio (RR) from NS to 0.59 for all exacerbations] versus single or double 
therapies with a variability in the response, depending the specific 
combination, and the comparison group. The proportion of adverse effects was 
similar between study groups, the exception being the increase in pneumonia for 
some inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) containing groups. The reviews of this paper 
are available via the supplementary material section.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466619885522
PMCID: PMC7000908
PMID: 31694491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: JLLC: has 
received over the last three years honoraria for lecturing, scientific advice, 
participation in clinical studies or writing for publications for (alphabetical 
order): AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, CSL Behring, Esteve, Ferrer, 
Gebro, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Menarini, Novartis, Rovi y Teva. JBS 
participated in speaking activities, advisory committees and consultancies 
during the period 2014-2019 sponsored by Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, CHEST, Chiesi, ERS, GEBRO, Grifols, GSK, Linde, Lipopharma, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, RiRL, Rovi, Sandoz, SEPAR and Takeda. JBS 
declares not receiving ever, directly or indirectly, funding from the tobacco 
industry or its affiliates. The rest of the authors declare no conflicts of 
interest.


369. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Apr 2;15:701-710. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S241568. eCollection 2020.

Inhaled Corticosteroid Treatment Regimens and Health Outcomes in a UK COPD 
Population Study.

Bloom CI(1), Douglas I(2), Usmani OS(1), Quint JK(1).

Author information:
(1)National Heart Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW3 6LR, UK.
(2)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Apr 22;15:869.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are a prevailing treatment option for 
COPD patients but recent guidelines have relegated their use predominantly to 
patients with frequent exacerbations. Yet large numbers of patients worldwide 
are currently treated with ICS-containing regimens. We wished to determine in 
routine clinical practice how common ICS withdrawal is and the differences in 
health outcomes between patients managed on ICS-containing and non-ICS 
containing regimens.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: COPD patients were identified from the UK primary care 
electronic healthcare records, between 2014 and 2018. Patients were grouped into 
three treatment regimens: long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) and inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS), LABA and long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), and 
triple therapy (LABA, LAMA and ICS). Annual incidence of ICS withdrawal was 
measured. Multivariable logistic regression was used to identify patient factors 
associated with withdrawal. Multivariable Poisson regression was used to assess 
the association of exacerbations and hospitalised pneumonia between the 
ICS-containing regimens (LABA-ICS and triple therapy) and patients prescribed 
LABA-LAMA.
RESULTS: Of 117,046 patients, around three-quarters were prescribed 
ICS-containing inhalers but ICS withdrawal occurred annually in only 
approximately 2-3% of patients. Exacerbations in the past year, but not a past 
history of pneumonia, were associated with ICS withdrawal. A total of 31,034 
patients using three treatment regimens (LABA-ICS, LABA-LAMA or triple therapy) 
were assessed for their relative risk of exacerbations and pneumonia; the 
exacerbation risk was slightly lower in LABA-ICS users but the same in triple 
therapy users, as compared to LABA-LAMA users (LABA-ICS adjusted IRR=0.82 (95% 
CI 0.73-0.93), triple adjusted IRR=0.99 (95% CI 0.88-1.11)). There was no 
difference in the pneumonia risk (LABA-ICS adjusted IRR=0.96 (95% CI 0.71-1.31), 
triple adjusted IRR=1.16 (95% CI 0.87-1.57)).
CONCLUSION: Use of ICS-containing inhaled medication is prevalent across the UK 
while ICS withdrawal from established treatment was relatively uncommon. 
Exacerbations and pneumonia risk was similar between the ICS-containing and 
non-ICS containing treatment regimens.

© 2020 Bloom et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S241568
PMCID: PMC7136662
PMID: 32308379

Conflict of interest statement: OSU and JKQ are co-last authors contributed to 
this study. CIB reports funding from AstraZeneca and Asthma UK which were 
received by JKQ, outside the submitted work. JKQ's research group reports 
funding from outside the submitted work from AstraZeneca, Asthma UK, The Health 
Foundation, MRC, Wellcome Trust, BLF, GlaxoSmithKline, Insmed, Bayer, IQVIA, and 
Boehringer Ingelheim. JKQ reports funding from outside the submitted work from 
AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Chiesi, Bayer, Teva, and Boehringer Ingelheim for 
Advisory board participation or travel. ID reports grants outside the submitted 
work from NIHR, GlaxoSmithKline, MRC, ABPI. OSU reports from outside the 
submitted work grants from AstraZeneca, Edmond Pharma and GlaxoSmithKline; 
personal fees from Aerocrine, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cipla, Mundipharma, Napp, 
Sandoz, Takeda and Zentiva. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


370. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;13:1753466619853500. doi: 
10.1177/1753466619853500.

The efficacy of adding budesonide/formoterol to ipratropium plus theophylline in 
managing severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: an open-label, randomized 
study in China.

Huang K(1)(2), Guo Y(3), Kang J(4), An L(5)(2), Zheng Z(6), Ma L(7), Peng L(8), 
Wang H(9), Su R(10), Itoh Y(11), Wang C(12)(13)(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Chao-Yang 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, China.
(2)Beijing Institute of Respiratory Medicine, China.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Hospital, 
Ministry of Health, Dongdan, China.
(4)The First Hospital of China Medical University, Heping, Shenyang, China.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Chao-Yang 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(6)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Yuexiu, China.
(7)Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, China.
(8)Jilin University First Hospital, Changchun, China.
(9)Hebei United University Affiliated Hospital, Tangshan, China.
(10)Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca, Shanghai, China.
(11)Biometrics, AstraZeneca, Osaka, Japan.
(12)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Hospital, China.
(13)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center of Respiratory 
Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(14)National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Diseases, Beijing, China.
(15)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China.
(16)Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Patients diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
in China are commonly prescribed ipratropium plus theophylline (I+T) therapy. 
Studies have shown that an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)/long-acting β2-agonist 
(LABA) combination is also efficacious in reducing symptoms and exacerbations. 
This study evaluated the efficacy and tolerability of adding 
budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FORM) to I+T in Chinese patients with severe COPD.
METHODS: A randomized, parallel-group, open-label, multicenter phase IV study 
(Clinical Trials.gov identifier: NCT01415518) was conducted in China. Patients 
received either BUD/FORM (160/4.5 µg; two inhalations twice daily [bid] via 
Turbuhaler®) + I (20 µg per inhalation, two inhalations four times daily) + T 
(100 mg bid) or I+T alone for 12 weeks. The primary efficacy variable was change 
from baseline in predose forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1).
RESULTS: A total of 584 patients were randomized equally between treatment 
groups. At the end of the study, the BUD/FORM plus I+T group displayed 
significant improvements in predose FEV1 versus the I+T group (between-group 
difference 6.9%; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 4.3, 9.6; p < 0.0001). Forced 
vital capacity, inspiratory capacity, peak expiratory flow and health-related 
quality of life (HRQoL) scores were significantly improved (all p < 0.0001) and 
exacerbation frequency was reduced (43.5% reduction; rate ratio 0.565, 95% CI 
0.325, 0.981; p = 0.0425) with BUD/FORM plus I+T versus I+T alone.
CONCLUSION: Patients with severe COPD in China treated with BUD/FORM plus I+T 
showed significant improvements in lung function and HRQoL and a reduction in 
exacerbations compared with I+T alone. Both treatments were well tolerated and 
no safety concerns were noted. The reviews of this paper are available via the 
supplemental material section.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466619853500
PMCID: PMC6595664
PMID: 31240995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: Rong Su and 
Yohji Itoh are current employees of AstraZeneca. Kewu Huang, Yanfei Guo, Jian 
Kang, Li An, Zeguang Zheng, Lijun Ma, Liping Peng, Hongyang Wang, and Chen Wang 
declare that they have no competing interests.


371. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 May 20;5(5):CD001287. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001287.pub6.

Mucolytic agents versus placebo for chronic bronchitis or chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Poole P(1), Sathananthan K, Fortescue R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, 
New Zealand.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jul 29;(7):CD001287.

BACKGROUND: Individuals with chronic bronchitis or chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) may suffer recurrent exacerbations with an increase in volume or 
purulence of sputum, or both. Personal and healthcare costs associated with 
exacerbations indicate that therapies that reduce the occurrence of 
exacerbations are likely to be useful. Mucolytics are oral medicines that are 
believed to increase expectoration of sputum by reducing its viscosity, thus 
making it easier to cough it up. Improved expectoration of sputum may lead to a 
reduction in exacerbations of COPD.
OBJECTIVES: Primary objective• To determine whether treatment with mucolytics 
reduces exacerbations and/or days of disability in patients with chronic 
bronchitis or COPDSecondary objectives• To assess whether mucolytics lead to 
improvement in lung function or quality of life• To determine frequency of 
adverse effects associated with use of mucolytics SEARCH METHODS: We searched 
the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register and reference lists of articles 
on 12 separate occasions, most recently on 23 April 2019.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised studies that compared oral mucolytic 
therapy versus placebo for at least two months in adults with chronic bronchitis 
or COPD. We excluded studies of people with asthma and cystic fibrosis.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: This review analysed summary data only, most 
derived from published studies. For earlier versions, one review author 
extracted data, which were rechecked in subsequent updates. In later versions, 
review authors double-checked extracted data and then entered data into RevMan 
5.3 for analysis.
MAIN RESULTS: We added four studies for the 2019 update. The review now includes 
38 trials, recruiting a total of 10,377 participants. Studies lasted between two 
months and three years and investigated a range of mucolytics, including 
N-acetylcysteine, carbocysteine, erdosteine, and ambroxol, given at least once 
daily. Many studies did not clearly describe allocation concealment, and we had 
concerns about blinding and high levels of attrition in some studies. The 
primary outcomes were exacerbations and number of days of disability.Results of 
28 studies including 6723 participants show that receiving mucolytics may be 
more likely to be exacerbation-free during the study period compared to those 
given placebo (Peto odds ratio (OR) 1.73, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.56 to 
1.91; moderate-certainty evidence). However, more recent studies show less 
benefit of treatment than was reported in earlier studies in this review. The 
overall number needed to treat with mucolytics for an average of nine months to 
keep an additional participant free from exacerbations was eight (NNTB 8, 95% CI 
7 to 10). High heterogeneity was noted for this outcome (I² = 62%), so results 
need to be interpreted with caution. The type or dose of mucolytic did not seem 
to alter the effect size, nor did the severity of COPD, including exacerbation 
history. Longer studies showed smaller effects of mucolytics than were reported 
in shorter studies.Mucolytic use was associated with a reduction of 0.43 days of 
disability per participant per month compared with use of placebo (95% CI -0.56 
to -0.30; studies = 9; I² = 61%; moderate-certainty evidence). With mucolytics, 
the number of people with one or more hospitalisations was reduced, but study 
results were not consistent (Peto OR 0.68, 95% CI 0.52 to 0.89; participants = 
1788; studies = 4; I² = 58%; moderate-certainty evidence). Investigators 
reported improved quality of life with mucolytics (mean difference (MD) -1.37, 
95% CI -2.85 to 0.11; participants = 2721; studies = 7; I² = 64%; 
moderate-certainty evidence). However, the mean difference did not reach the 
minimal clinically important difference of -4 units, and the confidence interval 
includes no difference. Mucolytic treatment was associated with a possible 
reduction in adverse events (OR 0.84, 95% CI 0.74 to 0.94; participants = 7264; 
studies = 24; I² = 46%; moderate-certainty evidence), but the pooled effect 
includes no difference if a random-effects model is used. Several studies that 
could not be included in the meta-analysis reported high numbers of adverse 
events, up to a mean of five events per person during follow-up. There was no 
clear difference between mucolytics and placebo for mortality, but the 
confidence interval is too wide to confirm that treatment has no effect on 
mortality (Peto OR 0.98, 95% CI 0.51 to 1.87; participants = 3527; studies = 11; 
I² = 0%; moderate-certainty evidence).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: In participants with chronic bronchitis or COPD, we are 
moderately confident that treatment with mucolytics leads to a small reduction 
in the likelihood of having an acute exacerbation, in days of disability per 
month and possibly hospitalisations, but is not associated with an increase in 
adverse events. There appears to be limited impact on lung function or 
health-related quality of life. Results are too imprecise to be certain whether 
or not there is an effect on mortality. Our confidence in the results is reduced 
by high levels of heterogeneity in many of the outcomes and the fact that 
effects on exacerbations shown in early trials were larger than those reported 
by more recent studies. This may be a result of greater risk of selection or 
publication bias in earlier trials, thus benefits of treatment may not be as 
great as was suggested by previous evidence.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001287.pub6
PMCID: PMC6527426
PMID: 31107966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PP: none known. I am an editor with Cochrane 
Airways. KS: none known. RF: none known. I am Joint Co‐ordinating Editor of 
Cochrane Airways, employed by an NIHR grant, and a qualified general 
practitioner.


372. Clin Respir J. 2019 Feb;13(2):120-124. doi: 10.1111/crj.12992.

The effect of isolated nocturnal oxygen desaturations on serum hs-CRP and IL-6 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Macrea MM(1), Owens RL(2), Martin T(1), Smith D(3), Oursler KK(4), Malhotra 
A(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Salem Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Salem, Virginia.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, California.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Virginia Tech Carilion School of 
Medicine, Roanoke, Virginia.
(4)Division of Geriatrics, Salem Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salem, 
Virginia.

INTRODUCTION: A majority of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) die of cardiovascular disease (CVD), yet the mechanisms responsible for 
this association are not fully understood. It remains unknown if isolated 
nocturnal oxygen desaturation (iNOD) could be one of the potential pathways by 
which the 'inflammatory COPD' phenotype leads to CVD.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to evaluate if COPD patients who meet the Medicare 
guidelines for nocturnal oxygen therapy (iNOT+) had higher serum hs-CRP and IL-6 
than those who did not meet the guidelines for iNOT (iNOT-).
METHODS: Patients with moderate to severe COPD (ie FEV1 < 80% and 
FEV1/FVC < 70), who were not on oxygen, underwent nocturnal oximetry on room 
air. Serum IL-6 and hs-CRP were collected the morning after the nocturnal 
oximetry testing.
RESULTS: A total of 28 patients were included in the study, 8 of whom had more 
than 5 minutes and 5% of their sleep time spent at oxygen saturation less than 
88% and constituted the iNOT+ group. Only serum hs-CRP was significantly higher 
in iNOT+ than iNOT- (P = 0.050). There was no difference in the rate of COPD 
exacerbations at one and three months, or five-year survival between the groups 
(P > 0.3).
CONCLUSION: COPD patients who have more than 5 minutes and 5% of their sleep 
time spent at oxygen saturation less than 88% have increased hs-CRP, which is 
associated with increased risk of future CVD.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.12992
PMCID: PMC6585441
PMID: 30638307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST All authors have stated 
explicitly that there are no conflicts of interest in connection with this 
article.


373. Adv Ther. 2019 Sep;36(9):2434-2449. doi: 10.1007/s12325-019-01015-3. Epub 2019 
Jul 2.

A Randomized, Double-Blind, Double-Dummy Study of Glycopyrrolate/Formoterol 
Fumarate Metered Dose Inhaler Relative to Umeclidinium/Vilanterol Dry Powder 
Inhaler in COPD.

Maltais F(1), Ferguson GT(2), Feldman GJ(3), Deslee G(4), Bourdin A(5), 
Fjällbrant H(6), Siwek-Posłuszna A(7), Jenkins MA(8), Martin UJ(9).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie 
de Québec, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada. Francois.Maltais@med.ulaval.ca.
(2)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(3)S. Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Spartanburg, SC, USA.
(4)Hôpital Maison Blanche, INSERM U1250, Service des Maladies Respiratoires, CHU 
de Reims, Reims, France.
(5)CHU Montpellier, PhyMedExp, INSERM, CNRS, Université de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(6)AstraZeneca Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.
(7)AstraZeneca, Warsaw, Poland.
(8)AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(9)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI), 
formulated using co-suspension delivery technology, is the only approved 
fixed-dose combination long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting β2-agonist 
(LAMA/LABA) delivered via MDI. Direct comparisons of GFF MDI versus other 
LAMA/LABAs have not previously been performed. We assessed the efficacy and 
safety of GFF MDI relative to umeclidinium/vilanterol dry powder inhaler (UV 
DPI) in patients with moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD).
METHODS: In this phase IIIb randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, multicenter, 
24-week study, patients received GFF MDI 18/9.6 μg (equivalent to 
glycopyrronium/formoterol fumarate dihydrate 14.4/10 μg; two inhalations per 
dose, twice-daily; n = 559) or UV DPI 62.5/25 μg (one inhalation, once-daily; 
n = 560). Primary endpoints were change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) and peak change from baseline in FEV1 
within 2 h post-dose, both over 24 weeks. Additional lung function, symptom and 
safety endpoints were also assessed.
RESULTS: For the primary endpoints, GFF MDI was non-inferior to UV DPI (using a 
margin of - 50 mL) for peak FEV1 (least squares mean [LSM] difference - 3.4 mL, 
97.5% confidence interval [CI] - 32.8, 25.9) but not for trough FEV1 (LSM 
difference - 87.2 mL; - 117.0, - 57.4). GFF MDI was nominally superior to UV DPI 
for onset of action (p < 0.0001) and was nominally non-inferior to UV DPI for 
all symptom endpoints (Transition Dyspnea Index focal score, Early 
Morning/Night-Time Symptoms COPD instrument scores, and COPD Assessment Test 
score). Exacerbation and safety findings were similar between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Over 24 weeks of treatment, GFF MDI was non-inferior to UV DPI for 
peak FEV1, but not for morning pre-dose trough FEV1. GFF MDI had a faster onset 
of action versus UV DPI. There were no clinically meaningful differences between 
treatments in symptom endpoints. Both treatments were well tolerated with 
similar safety profiles.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT03162055 (Clinicaltrials.gov) FUNDING: AstraZeneca.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-019-01015-3
PMID: 31267366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Qual Life Res. 2019 Jul;28(7):1885-1892. doi: 10.1007/s11136-019-02123-x. Epub 
2019 Feb 1.

Comparison between the EQ-5D-3L and the SF-6D quality of life (QOL) 
questionnaires in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
undergoing lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS).

Thuppal S(1), Markwell S(2), Crabtree T(2), Hazelrigg S(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Clinical Research, Southern Illinois University School of 
Medicine, Springfield, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, 
Springfield, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, 
Springfield, USA. shazelrigg@siumed.edu.

PURPOSE: Lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS) has been shown to improve lung 
function, but also improve the overall quality of life (QOL). The aim of this 
study is to compare two QOL questionnaires-EuroQol Questionnaire (EQ-5D-3L) and 
36-item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) in patients post-LVRS.
METHODS: All patients undergoing LVRS for severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) at a single center of excellence were analyzed (n = 94). Baseline 
demographic and clinical outcomes were characterized. Both EQ-5D-3L and SF-36 
questionnaires were administered to all patients at baseline (n = 94) and at the 
end of 1 year (n = 89) post-surgery. SF-36 was converted to Short Form 
six-dimensions (SF-6D) using standard algorithm. Correlation, discrimination, 
responsiveness and differences across the two questionnaires were examined.
RESULTS: The mean age of patients enrolled in the cohort was 66 years. There was 
significant increase in forced expiratory volume (FEV1, 43%), forced vital 
capacity (FVC 46%), diffusion capacity (DLCO 15%), 6 min walk distance test 
(6MWD 21%) and a significant decrease in residual volume (RV 23%) at the end of 
1-year follow-up. The overall mean utility index significantly improved for both 
SF-6D and EQ-5D-3L questionnaires at the end of follow-up (p = 0.0001). However, 
the magnitude of percentage increase was higher with EQ-5D-3L compared to SF-6D 
(32% vs. 13%). Stronger correlations confirmed convergent validity at the end of 
1-year follow-up between similar domains. Both questionnaires failed to 
discriminate between different levels of disease severity post-LVRS in patients 
with severe COPD.
CONCLUSIONS: Both questionnaires responded similarly in patients with COPD 
post-LVRS. Combining results from QOL questionnaire(s) along with symptoms of 
disease and history of exacerbation may be a possible solution for identifying 
disease severity in old and sick patients unwilling/unable to come to hospital 
for a pulmonary function test post-LVRS.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-019-02123-x
PMID: 30707368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 2;14:1993-2002. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S214690. eCollection 2019.

Diagnosis and management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Serbia: an 
expert group position statement.

Vukoja M(1)(2), Kopitovic I(1)(2), Lazic Z(3)(4), Milenkovic B(5)(6), Stankovic 
I(7)(8), Zvezdin B(1)(2), Dudvarski Ilic A(5)(6), Cekerevac I(3)(4), Vukcevic 
M(6)(9), Zugic V(5)(6), Hromis S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Institute for Pulmonary Diseases of Vojvodina, Sremska Kamenica, Serbia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(3)Clinic for Pulmonology, Clinical Centre Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia.
(5)Clinic for Pulmonology, Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(7)Clinic for Lung Diseases, Clinical Centre of Nis, Nis, Serbia.
(8)Faculty of Medicine, University of Nis, Nis, Serbia.
(9)Clinical Hospital Centre Zemun, Belgrade, Serbia.

In recent years, several national chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
guidelines have been issued. In Serbia, the burden of COPD is high and most of 
the patients are diagnosed at late stages. Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) strategy is poorly implemented in real-life 
practice, as many patients are still prescribed inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS)-containing regimens and slow-release theophylline. In this document, we 
propose an algorithm for treating COPD patients in Serbia based on national 
experts' opinion, taking into account global recommendations and recent findings 
from clinical trials that are tailored according to local needs. We identified 
four major components of COPD treatment based on country specifics: active case 
finding and early diagnosis in high-risk population, therapeutic algorithm for 
initiation and escalation of therapy that is simple and easy to use in real-life 
practice, de-escalation of ICS in low-risk non-exacerbators, and individual 
choice of inhaler device based on patients' ability and preferences. With this 
approach we aim to facilitate implementation of the recommendation, initiate the 
treatment in early stages, improve cost-effectiveness, reduce possible side 
effects, and ensure efficient treatment.

© 2019 Vukoja et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S214690
PMCID: PMC6730542
PMID: 31564847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MV has received honoraria for scientific advice 
and/or for lecturing from Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis, 
outside the submitted work. IK has received honoraria for scientific advice 
and/or for lecturing from AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Teva, Chiesi, Menarini, outside the submitted work. ZL has received 
honoraria for lecturing from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Novartis, Teva, Chiesi, outside the submitted work. BZ has received honoraria 
for scientific advice and/or for lecturing from AstraZeneca, Glaxo SmithKline, 
Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Menarini, outside the submitted work. 
ADI has received honoraria for scientific advice and/or lecturing from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, outside the 
submitted work. IC has received honoraria for lecturing from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, outside the submitted work. MV 
has received honoraria for scientific advice and/or for lecturing from 
AstraZeneca, Glaxo SmithKline, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Teva, Chiesi 
outside the submitted work. VZ has received honoraria for scientific advice 
and/or for lecturing from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Teva, Chiesi, Novartis, outside the submitted work. SH has received honoraria 
for scientific advice and/or for lecturing from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Teva, Chiesi, Novartis, outside the submitted work. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


376. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Apr;98(17):e15171. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000015171.

Procalcitonin, C-reactive protein, PaCO2, and noninvasive mechanical ventilation 
failure in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation.

Wang J, Shang H, Yang X, Guo S, Cui Z.

It is unclear whether procalcitonin (PCT) is correlated with noninvasive 
ventilation (NIV) failure. This retrospective case-control study aimed to 
compare PCT levels, C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, and PaCO2 in patients 
(05/2014-03/2015 at the Harrison International Peace Hospital, China) with acute 
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) and NIV 
failure/success.This was a retrospective case-control study of patients with 
AECOPD who required NIV between May 2014 and March 2015. All consecutive 
patients with AECOPD admitted at the Department of Critical Care Medicine and 
transferred from the general ward were included in the study. Hemogram, PCT, 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), arterial blood gas (ABG), and CRP levels 
were measured ≤1 hour before NIV was used. NIV was considered to have failed if 
at least one of the following criteria was met: cardiac arrest or severe 
hemodynamic instability; respiratory arrest or gasping; mask intolerance; 
difficulty in clearing bronchial secretions; or worsening of ABGs or sensorium 
level during NIV. The factors associated with NIV failure were determined.A 
total of 376 patients were included: 286 with successful NIV and 90 wither NIV 
failure. The multivariate analysis showed that PCT (OR = 2.0, 95%CI: 1.2-3.2, 
P = .006), CRP (OR = 1.2, 95%CI: 1.1-1.3, P < .001), and PaCO2 (OR = 1.1, 95%CI: 
1.1-1.2, P < .001) ≤1 hour before NIV were independently associated with NIV 
failure. The optimal cutoff were 0.31 ng/mL for PCT (sensitivity, 83.3%; 
specificity, 83.7%), 15.0 mg/mL for CRP (sensitivity, 75.6%; specificity, 
93.0%), and 73.5 mm Hg for PaCO2 (sensitivity, 71.1%; specificity, 100%). The 
area under the curve (AUC) was 0.854 for PCT, 0.849 for CRP, and 0.828 for 
PaCO2. PCT, CRP, and PaCO2 were used to obtain a combined prediction factor, 
which achieved an AUC of 0.978 (95%CI: 0.961-0.995).High serum PCT, CRP, and 
PaCO2 levels predict NIV failure for patients with AECOPD. The combination of 
these three parameters might enable even more accurate prediction.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000015171
PMCID: PMC6831316
PMID: 31027061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Bras Pneumol. 2019 Dec 20;46(3):e20190223. doi: 10.36416/1806-3756/e20190223. 
eCollection 2020.

Symptom variability over the course of the day in patients with stable COPD in 
Brazil: a real-world observational study.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Cukier A(1), Godoy I(2), Costa CHD(3), Rubin AS(4), Gregorio MG(5), Albuquerque 
Neto AA(6), Lima MA(7), Pereira MC(8), Tanni SE(2), Athanazio RA(1), Bessa 
EJC(3), Wehrmeister FC(9), Lourenco CB(10), Menezes AMB(9).

Author information:
(1). Divisão de Pneumologia, Instituto do Coração - InCor - Hospital das 
Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP) 
Brasil.
(2). Disciplina de Pneumologia, Faculdade de Medicina de Botucatu, Universidade 
Estadual Paulista - UNESP - Botucatu (SP) Brasil.
(3). Disciplina de Pneumologia, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro - UERJ 
- Rio de Janeiro (RJ) Brasil.
(4). Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Santa Casa de 
Misericórdia de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre (RS) Brasil.
(5). Clínica Médica Netspiro, São Bernardo do Campo (SP) Brasil.
(6). Departamento de Pneumologia, Centro de Reabilitação Pulmonar, Universidade 
Federal de São Paulo - UNIFESP - São Paulo (SP) Brasil.
(7). Hospital Dia do Pulmão, Blumenau (SC) Brasil.
(8). Disciplina de Pneumologia, Departamento de Clínica Médica, Faculdade de 
Ciências Médicas, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas (SP) Brasil.
(9). Programa de Pós-Graduação em Epidemiologia, Universidade Federal de 
Pelotas, Pelotas (RS) Brasil.
(10). AstraZeneca do Brasil, São Paulo (SP) Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze symptoms at different times of day in patients with COPD.
METHODS: This was a multicenter, cross-sectional observational study conducted 
at eight centers in Brazil. We evaluated morning, daytime, and nighttime 
symptoms in patients with stable COPD.
RESULTS: We included 593 patients under regular treatment, of whom 309 (52.1%) 
were male and 92 (15.5%) were active smokers. The mean age was 67.7 years, and 
the mean FEV1 was 49.4% of the predicted value. In comparison with the patients 
who had mild or moderate symptoms, the 183 (30.8%) with severe symptoms were 
less physically active (p = 0.002), had greater airflow limitation (p < 0.001), 
had more outpatient exacerbations (p = 0.002) and more inpatient exacerbations 
(p = 0.043), as well as scoring worse on specific instruments. The most common 
morning and nighttime symptoms were dyspnea (in 45.2% and 33.1%, respectively), 
cough (in 37.5% and 33.3%, respectively), and wheezing (in 24.4% and 27.0%, 
respectively). The intensity of daytime symptoms correlated strongly with that 
of morning symptoms (r = 0.65, p < 0.001) and that of nighttime symptoms (r = 
0.60, p < 0.001), as well as with the COPD Assessment Test score (r = 0.62; p < 
0.001), although it showed only a weak correlation with FEV1 (r = -0.205; p < 
0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Dyspnea was more common in the morning than at night. Having 
morning or nighttime symptoms was associated with greater daytime symptom 
severity. Symptom intensity was strongly associated with poor quality of life 
and with the frequency of exacerbations, although it was weakly associated with 
airflow limitation.

DOI: 10.36416/1806-3756/e20190223
PMID: 31859705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Turk J Med Sci. 2019 Aug 8;49(4):1073-1078. doi: 10.3906/sag-1901-164.

Diaphragmatic thickness in chronic obstructive lung disease and relationship 
with clinical severity parameters.

Ogan N(1), Aydemir Y(2), EVrin T(3), Ataç GK(4), Baha A(5), Katipoğlu B(3), 
Süzen B(6), Akpınar EE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Faculty of Medicine, Ufuk University, Ankara, 
Turkey
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Faculty of Medicine, Sakarya University, Sakarya, 
Turkey
(3)Department of Emergencies, Faculty of Medicine, Ufuk University, Ankara, 
Turkey
(4)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Ufuk University, Ankara, Turkey
(5)Department of Pulmonology, Girne Dr. Akçiçek Hospital, Girne, North Cyprus
(6)Department of Nutrition and Diet, Faculty of Medicine, Ufuk University, 
Ankara, Turkey

BACKGROUND/AIM: Sonographic assessment of diaphragm structure and function would 
be a useful clinical tool in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Our aim was to determine the muscle thickness of the diaphragm and the 
usefulness of clinical practice in patients with COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The diaphragmatic thickness of 34 COPD patients and 34 
healthy subjects was measured during tidal volume (Tmin) and deep inspiration 
(Tmax) on both sides using a B-mode ultrasound. The body mass index and the 
modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) index values were reported.
RESULTS: There was no correlation among TminR (P = 0.134), TminL (P = 0.647), 
TmaxR (P = 0.721), and TmaxL (P = 0.905) between the patients with COPD and the 
control group. There was also no significant difference between diaphragmatic 
thickness and COPD severity, respiratory function (P = 0.410), and frequency of 
exacerbations (P = 0.881) and mMRC (P = 0.667).
CONCLUSION: Diaphragmatic dysfunction in COPD is related to mobility restriction 
rather than muscle thickness.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License.

DOI: 10.3906/sag-1901-164
PMCID: PMC7018351
PMID: 31293145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: none declared


379. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2019 Jul 24;6(3):221-232. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.6.3.2018.0160.

A Retrospective Claims Analysis of Dual Bronchodilator Fixed-Dose Combination 
Versus Bronchodilator Monotherapy in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease.

Strange C(1), Walker V(2), Tong J(2), Kurlander J(2), Carlyle M(2), Millette 
LA(3), Wittbrodt E(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston.
(2)Optum, Inc., Eden Prairie, Minnesota.
(3)AstraZeneca, Wilmington, Delaware.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
increasingly receive combination bronchodilator therapies. Real world evidence 
for the benefits of combination therapy compared to monotherapy is lacking.
METHODS: COPD patients aged ≥ 40 years initiating monotherapy (MT) with either a 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) or long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA) or 
dual therapy (DT) with a LAMA/LABA fixed dose combination (FDC) between January 
1, 2016 and December 31, 2016 were identified from a large U.S. administrative 
claims database. Patients diagnosed with cystic fibrosis, idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis, or asthma were excluded. Cohorts were propensity score matched 1:1 
using baseline measures (e.g., exacerbations, hospitalizations) as proxies for 
COPD severity to create balanced cohorts.
RESULTS: Following propensity score matching (PSM), 1286 patients remained in 
each cohort for analysis. Patients were followed for approximately 1 year. 
Patients in the DT versus MT cohort had lower rates of exacerbations leading to 
hospitalization (incidence rate ratio 0.7886; p=0.019), lower mean COPD-related 
pharmacy costs per patient per month (PPPM) ($300 versus $379, respectively; 
p<0.001) and total costs PPPM ($990 versus $1203, respectively; p=0.003). This 
occurred despite lower mean COPD-related pharmacy fills PPPM in the DT versus MT 
cohorts (1.41 versus 1.51, respectively; p=0.038). Patients in the DT cohort had 
lower rates of switching (p<0.001) and augmentation (p<0.001), and higher rates 
of non-persistence (p<0.001) versus the MT cohort. Rates of discontinuation were 
similar.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients in the DT cohort had lower rates of exacerbations leading 
to hospitalization, lower COPD-related pharmacy and total costs PPPM, and lower 
rates of switching and augmentation compared to patients in the MT cohort.

JCOPDF © 2019.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.6.3.2018.0160
PMCID: PMC6872213
PMID: 31342728

Conflict of interest statement: This study was funded by AstraZeneca 
Pharmaceuticals LP (Wilmington, Delaware). Optum, Inc., was contracted by 
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP to conduct this study and develop the manuscript. 
Dr. Charlie Strange reports personal fees and non-financial support from 
AstraZeneca, CSA Medical, GlaxoSmithKline, and BTG, grants, personal fees, 
non-financial support from Pulmonx, personal fees from Uptake Medical, and 
grants from MatRx, all in COPD outside the submitted work. Mr. Jonathan 
Kurlander, Ms. Maureen Carlyle, Dr. Junliang Tong, and Ms. Valery Walker 
received support from AstraZeneca during the time that this study was conducted. 
Dr. Eric Wittbrodt reports that he is an employee of AstraZeneca. Dr. Lauren A. 
Millette reports that she was an employee of AstraZeneca during the time that 
this study was conducted and is currently an employee of Genentech. The authors 
report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


380. COPD. 2019 Dec;16(5-6):406-417. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1679102. Epub 2019 
Oct 22.

Prevalence, Contribution to Disease Burden and Management of Comorbid Depression 
and Anxiety in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Narrative Review.

Zareifopoulos N(1), Bellou A(1), Spiropoulou A(1), Spiropoulos K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, University of Patras School of Health Science, 
Patras, Achaea, Greece.

Mental health issues such as depression and anxiety are common comorbidities of 
individuals suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), though 
they are frequently underdiagnosed and consequently undertreated. To that end we 
sought to identify the impact of co-morbid anxiety and depression in COPD 
patients and evaluate recent evidence regarding the management of such cases. A 
Pubmed search was conducted for relevant original articles with emphasis on the 
past 5 years. The studies we identified indicate that psychiatric comorbidity 
negatively impacts the prognosis of COPD, as it is associated with reduced 
adherence to treatment, reduced physical activity and a general reduction in 
quality of life, in turn leading to more frequent exacerbations and increased 
severity of exacerbations (which are more likely to require hospitalization), 
resulting in increased mortality. Despite the evidence showing a high prevalence 
and exceedingly negative impact of depression and anxiety in patients with COPD, 
very few clinical trials (for both pharmacological and psychological treatments) 
with small sample sizes have been conducted in this population. As treatment for 
co-morbid mental health conditions may reduce mortality, interventions to ensure 
prompt identification of mental health issues and subsequent initiation of 
treatment are warranted.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1679102
PMID: 31638445


381. Praxis (Bern 1994). 2019 Sep;108(11):737-740. doi: 10.1024/1661-8157/a003285.

[Long-Term Non-Invasive Ventilation for Chronic Respiratory Failure].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Brack T(1).

Author information:
(1)Kantonsspital Glarus.

Long-Term Non-Invasive Ventilation for Chronic Respiratory Failure Abstract. 
Non-invasive long-term ventilation (NIV) may be helpful for selected patients 
with severe COPD and chronic respiratory lailure (chronic hypercapnia and 
hypoxemia). The patient described in the case report became normocapnic under 
long-term NIV and both her sleep and quality of life improved significantly. She 
also suffered fewer COPD exacerbations and was better able to cope with them 
herself with the help of NIV.

Publisher: Zusammenfassung. Die nicht-invasive Langzeitbeatmung (NIV)kann für 
ausgewählte Patienten mit schwerer COPD und chronischer respiratorischer 
Globalinsuffizienz (chronische Hyperkapnie und Hypoxämie) hilfreich sein. Die im 
Fallbericht geschilderte Patientin wurde unter Langzeit-NIV normokapnisch, und 
sowohl ihre Schlaf- als auch ihre Lebensqualität besserten sich deutlich. 
Ausserdem erlitt sie weniger COPD-Exazerbationen und konnte diese mit Hilfe der 
NIV besser selber meistern.

DOI: 10.1024/1661-8157/a003285
PMID: 31480963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jan 23;14:311-319. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S188186. eCollection 2019.

Phenotyping and outcomes of hospitalized COPD patients using rapid molecular 
diagnostics on sputum samples.

Alotaibi NM(1)(2), Chen V(1)(3)(4), Hollander Z(1)(3)(4), Leipsic JA(5), Hague 
CJ(5), Murphy DT(5), DeMarco ML(1)(6), FitzGerald JM(3)(7)(8), McManus 
BM(1)(3)(4)(6), Ng RT(4)(9), Sin DD(1)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, James Hogg Research Centre, St Paul's 
Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, don.sin@hli.ubc.ca.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, College of Medicine, 
King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Institute for Heart and Lung Health, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 
don.sin@hli.ubc.ca.
(4)PROOF Centre of Excellence, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(5)Department of Radiology, St Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(7)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, don.sin@hli.ubc.ca.
(8)The Lung Centre, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(9)Department of Computer Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Etiologies of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (AECOPD) are heterogeneous. We phenotyped severe AECOPD based on 
molecular pathogen detection of sputum samples collected at hospitalization of 
COPD patients and determined their outcomes.
METHODS: We phenotyped 72 sputum samples of COPD patients who were hospitalized 
with a primary diagnosis of AECOPD using a molecular array that detected common 
bacterial and viral respiratory pathogens. Based on these results, the patients 
were classified into positive or negative pathogen groups. The pathogen-positive 
group was further divided into virus or bacteria subgroups. Admission day 1 
blood samples were assayed for N-terminal prohormone brain natriuretic peptide, 
CRP, and complete blood counts.
RESULTS: A total of 52 patients had a positive result on the array, while 20 
patients had no pathogens detected. The most common bacterial pathogen detected 
was Haemophilus influenzae and the most common virus was rhinovirus. The 
pathogen-negative group had the worse outcomes with longer hospital stays 
(median 6.5 vs 5 days for bacteria-positive group, P=0.02) and a trend toward 
increased 1-year mortality (P=0.052). The bacteria-positive group had the best 
prognosis, whereas the virus-positive group had outcomes somewhere in between 
the bacteria-positive and pathogen-negative groups.
CONCLUSION: Molecular diagnostics on sputum can rapidly phenotype serious AECOPD 
into bacteria-, virus-, or pathogen-negative groups. The bacteria-positive group 
appears to have the best prognosis, while pathogen-negative group has the worst. 
These data suggest that AECOPD is a heterogeneous event and that accurate 
phenotyping of AECOPD may lead to novel management strategies that are 
personalized and more precise.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S188186
PMCID: PMC6350828
PMID: 30774328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure DDS reports grants and personal fees 
from AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim, grants from Merck Frosst, and 
personal fees from Novartis, Regeneron, and Sanofi Aventis outside the submitted 
work. JAL reports grants from GE Healthcare outside the submitted work. The 
authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


383. COPD. 2019 Feb;16(1):104-107. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1592144. Epub 2019 Apr 
29.

The COPD Comorbidome in the Light of the Degree of Dyspnea and Risk of 
Exacerbation.

Figueira Gonçalves JM(1), García Bello MÁ(2), Martín Martínez MD(3), Pérez 
Méndez LI(2)(4), García-Talavera I(1), García Hernández S(1), Díaz Pérez D(1), 
Bethencourt Martín N(1).

Author information:
(1)a Pneumology and Thoracic Surgery Service , University Hospital Nuestra 
Señora de la Candelaria (HUNSC) , Santa Cruz de Tenerife , Spain.
(2)b Division of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Research Unit , 
University Hospital Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria (HUNSC) and Primary Care 
Management , Santa Cruz de Tenerife , Spain.
(3)c Clinical Analysis Service , University Hospital Nuestra Señora de la 
Candelaria (HUNSC) , Santa Cruz de Tenerife , España.
(4)d Networked Biomedical Research Centre (CIBER) of Respiratory Diseases , 
Carlos III Health Institute , Madrid , Spai'n.

Erratum in
    COPD. 2019 Aug;16(3-4):310.

The BODE group designed a bubble chart, analogous to the solar system, which 
depicts the prevalence of each disease and its association with mortality and 
called it a "comorbidome". Although this graph was used to represent mortality 
and, later, the risk of needing hospital admission, it was not applied to 
visualize the association between a set of comorbidities and the categories of 
the GOLD 2017 guidelines, neither according to the degree of dyspnea nor to the 
risk of exacerbation. For the purpose of knowing to which extent each 
comorbidity associates with each of the two conditions-most symptomatic group 
(groups B and D) and highest risk of exacerbation (groups C and D)-we performed 
a analysis based on the comorbidome. 439 patients were included. Cardiovascular 
comorbidity (especially cardiac and renal disease) is predominantly observed in 
patients with a higher degree of dyspnea, whereas bronchial asthma and stroke 
occur more frequently in subjects at higher risk of exacerbation. This is the 
first time that the comorbidome is presented based on the categories of the GOLD 
2017 document, which we hope will serve as a stimulus for scientific debate.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1592144
PMID: 31032664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Clin Nurs. 2019 Jan;28(1-2):190-200. doi: 10.1111/jocn.14646. Epub 2018 Aug 
29.

"Thrust out of normality"-How adults living with cystic fibrosis experience 
pulmonary exacerbations: A qualitative study.

Schmid-Mohler G(1), Caress AL(2), Spirig R(3), Benden C(4), Yorke J(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Clinical Nursing Science, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Division of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work, School of Health Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Division of Pulmonology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

AIM AND OBJECTIVES: To explore the experience of pulmonary exacerbation from the 
perspective of adults with cystic fibrosis.
BACKGROUND: While management of pulmonary exacerbations is a pillar of cystic 
fibrosis care, little is known of patients' perspectives. Understanding the 
patient's experience is essential for developing and evaluating interventions in 
support of patient self-management.
DESIGN: Qualitative study with longitudinal study in a subsample.
METHODS: The study took place from 2015-2016 in a university hospital. Eighteen 
patients with cystic fibrosis were included who were ≥18 years of age and had no 
solid organ transplant. Patients' experiences were explored through 
semistructured interviews and analysed using framework analysis. They each 
participated in one interview, with a subsample (N = 7) being interviewed twice 
during and once after antibiotic therapy.
RESULTS: Patients (11 men and 7 women; median age 29.5 years, range 19-55 years; 
median FEV1 45%, range FEV1 23%-105%) experienced pulmonary exacerbations as 
disruptions of their normality, which led to a substantial increase in their 
emotional distress. Exacerbations represented a period of threat and domination 
by CF; that is, symptoms and treatment consumed energy, restricted physical 
activity and daily life roles. "Noting change," "waiting until antibiotics 
help," "returning to normality" and "establishing a new normality" characterised 
their descriptions of the pulmonary exacerbation trajectory. Emotional distress 
was the major driver for patients' self-management, and personal goals and 
illness beliefs influenced also patients' self-management decisions.
CONCLUSION: The experienced degree and source of emotional distress are drivers 
for self-management decisions in patients with cystic fibrosis who experience a 
pulmonary exacerbation.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Our data provide new understanding that will be 
essential to informing clinical practice, future patient-reported outcomes 
measures and intervention development.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.14646
PMID: 30091490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Clin Sleep Med. 2019 Jan 15;15(1):71-77. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.7574.

Poor Outcomes Among Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease With 
Higher Risk for Undiagnosed Obstructive Sleep Apnea in the LOTT Cohort.

Donovan LM(1)(2), Feemster LC(1)(2), Udris EM(1), Griffith MF(1)(2), Spece 
LJ(1)(2), Palen BN(1)(2), He K(1)(2), Parthasarathy S(3), Strohl KP(4), Kapur 
VK(1)(2), Au DH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Healthcare System, Seattle, Washington.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University 
of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona.
(4)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, Ohio.

Comment in
    J Clin Sleep Med. 2019 Jan 15;15(1):9-10.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Evaluate consequences of intermediate to high risk of 
undiagnosed obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) among individuals with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Using data from the Long Term Oxygen Treatment Trial (LOTT), we 
assessed OSA risk at study entry among patients with COPD. We compared outcomes 
among those at intermediate to high risk (modified STOP-BANG score ≥ 3) relative 
to low risk (score < 3) for OSA. We compared risk of mortality or first 
hospitalization with proportional hazard models, and incidence of COPD 
exacerbations using negative binomial regression. We adjusted analyses for 
demographics, body mass index, and comorbidities. Last, we compared St. George 
Respiratory Questionnaire and Quality of Well-Being Scale results between OSA 
risk groups.
RESULTS: Of the 222 participants studied, 164 (74%) were at intermediate to high 
risk for OSA based on the modified STOP-BANG score. Relative to the 58 low-risk 
individuals, the adjusted hazard ratio of mortality or first hospitalization was 
1.61 (95% confidence interval 1.01-2.58) for those at intermediate to high risk 
of OSA. Risk for OSA was also associated with increased frequency of COPD 
exacerbations (adjusted incidence rate ratio: 1.78, 95% confidence interval 
1.10-2.89). Respiratory symptoms by St. George Respiratory Questionnaire were 
5.5 points greater (P = .05), and Quality of Well-Being Scale scores were .05 
points lower (P < .01) among those at intermediate to high risk for OSA, 
indicating more severe respiratory symptoms and lower quality of life.
CONCLUSIONS: Among individuals with COPD, greater risk for undiagnosed OSA is 
associated with poor outcomes. Increased recognition and management of OSA in 
this group could improve outcomes.

© 2019 American Academy of Sleep Medicine.

DOI: 10.5664/jcsm.7574
PMCID: PMC6329538
PMID: 30621828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 4;14:2047-2060. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S213520. eCollection 2019.

Evaluation of rescue medication use and medication adherence receiving 
umeclidinium/vilanterol versus tiotropium bromide/olodaterol.

Moretz C(1), Bengtson LG(2), Sharpsten L(2), Koep E(2), Le L(2), Tong J(2), 
Stanford RH(1), Hahn B(1), Ray R(1).

Author information:
(1)Glaxo Smith Kline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Optum, Eden Prairie, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND: This was the first real-world head-to-head study comparing inhaled 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting β2-agonist fixed-dose combination 
treatments as maintenance therapy.
METHODS: Retrospective observational study including commercial, Medicare 
Advantage with Part D or Part D-only enrollees aged ≥40 years from the Optum 
Research Database. Patients initiated umeclidinium/vilanterol (UMEC/VI) or 
tiotropium bromide/olodaterol (TIO/OLO) between June 1, 2015 and November 30, 
2016 (index date) with 12 months of pre- and post-index continuous enrollment. 
Outcomes were modeled following the inverse probability of treatment weighting. 
The primary endpoint, rescue medication use, was modeled using weighted ordinary 
least squares regression with bootstrapped variance estimation. Intent-to-treat 
analysis evaluated non-inferiority and superiority of UMEC/VI to TIO/OLO with 
thresholds of 0.30 and 0 units, respectively. On-treatment sensitivity analysis 
evaluated the superiority of UMEC/VI to TIO/OLO for rescue medication use. The 
secondary endpoint, medication adherence (proportion of days covered [PDC]≥80%), 
was evaluated using weighted logistic regression. Post hoc weighted Cox 
proportional hazards regression analysis evaluated escalation to multiple 
inhaler triple therapy (MITT).
RESULTS: The study population included 14,324 patients; 9549 initiated UMEC/VI 
and 4775 initiated TIO/OLO. During the 12-month post-index period, UMEC/VI 
initiators used 0.16 fewer adjusted mean units of rescue medication than TIO/OLO 
initiators (95% CI: -0.28, -0.04), meeting pre-specified non-inferiority 
(P<0.001) and superiority (P=0.005) criteria; the on-treatment sensitivity 
analysis for superiority was not statistically significant. Significantly more 
UMEC/VI than TIO/OLO initiators (28.6% vs 22.7%; P<0.001) achieved a clinically 
meaningful level (PDC≥80%) of medication adherence. The adjusted risk of 
escalation to MITT was similar between treatment groups (HR=0.93; 95% CI: 0.81, 
1.06; P=0.268).
CONCLUSION: UMEC/VI was superior to TIO/OLO for rescue medication use and 
UMEC/VI initiators had better medication adherence than TIO/OLO initiators. This 
study supports findings from a head-to-head trial that demonstrated significant, 
clinically meaningful improvements in lung function with UMEC/VI versus TIO/OLO.

© 2019 Moretz et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S213520
PMCID: PMC6732570
PMID: 31564852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CM, BH, RR, and RHS are employees of GSK and 
hold stocks/shares in GSK. LGSB, EK, LL, and JT are employees of Optum. EK 
reports grant from GlaxoSmithKline, during the conduct of the study. LS was an 
employee of Optum at the time of the study, which was contracted by GSK to 
conduct the study. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.


387. Mol Med Rep. 2019 Nov;20(5):4293-4302. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2019.10657. Epub 2019 
Sep 9.

miRNA‑101‑3p.1 as an independent diagnostic biomarker aggravates chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease via activation of the EGFR/PI3K/AKT signaling 
pathway.

Chen S(1), Zhang Z(1), Chen L(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Department of Internal Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003, P.R. China.

Exploring independent biomarkers and delineating pathogenic mechanisms could 
improve the early diagnosis and treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). In the present study, a study was conducted to determine the 
diagnostic potential of miRNA‑101‑3p.1 in identifying stable COPD (SCOPD) and 
acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) patients and to reveal the molecular 
mechanism by which miRNA‑101‑3p.1 regulates COPD progression. miRNA‑101‑3p.1 
profiles in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of COPD patients were evaluated. 
Subsequently, receiver operating characteristic curves were created to 
demonstrate the diagnostic accuracy of miRNA‑101‑3p.1 in discriminating SCOPD 
and AECOPD. Finally, the molecular mechanism by which miRNA‑101‑3p.1 regulates 
COPD progression was explored. The present study revealed that patients with 
COPD, and especially patients with AECOPD, had significantly increased levels of 
miRNA‑101‑3p.1 and the level of miRNA‑101‑3p.1 was closely correlated with CAT 
score and FEV1% predicted. Notably, miRNA‑101‑3p.1 accurately discriminated 
SCOPD and AECOPD. Furthermore, increasing miRNA‑101‑3p.1 promoted cell 
proliferation and induced the expression of inflammatory cytokines. Mechanistic 
investigations revealed that miRNA‑101‑3p.1 inhibited the expression of von 
Hippel‑Lindau tumor suppressor (pVHL) and ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2 D1 
(UBE2D1). pVHL and UBE2D1 co‑upregulated HIF‑1α, and HIF‑1α mediated activation 
of the EGFR/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. The present results collectively 
demonstrated that miRNA‑101‑3p.1 could act as an independent biomarker for the 
diagnosis of SCOPD and AECOPD, and that miRNA‑101‑3p.1 facilitates COPD 
progression by activating the EGFR/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2019.10657
PMID: 31545413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Aug;57(8):384-392. doi: 10.5414/CP203382.

Effect of triple therapy in patients with asthma-COPD overlap .

Ishiura Y, Fujimura M, Ohkura N, Hara J, Kasahara K, Ishii N, Tamaki T, Shimizu 
T, Nomura S.

OBJECTIVE: Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap (ACO) is 
of increasing interest because ACO patients have significantly worse outcomes, 
leading to greater social and economic burdens compared with asthma or COPD 
alone. Some guidelines for ACO recommend triple therapy with inhaled 
corticosteroids, long-acting β2 agonists, and long-acting muscarinic 
antagonists. However, this approach is based on extrapolating data from patients 
with asthma or COPD alone. Therapeutic studies for ACO have not previously been 
conducted.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A 12-week, randomized, open-label cross-over pilot study 
was conducted in 17 ACO patients to evaluate the effect of umeclidinium (UMEC) 
62.5 µg once-daily added to fluticasone furoate/vilanterol (FF/VI) 200/25 µg 
once-daily. A 4-week run-in, a first and a second 4-week treatment period were 
included. Respiratory function, respiratory impedance, fractional exhaled nitric 
oxide, COPD assessment test, and asthma control test scores were evaluated 0, 4, 
and 8 weeks after randomization.
RESULTS: Mean values of post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
as a percentage of the predicted value (%FEV1), after UMEC was added to FF/VI, 
were significantly higher than after the run-in (p < 0.01). Mean values of 
resonant frequency during inspiration (Fres), after UMEC was added to FF/VI, 
were significantly lower than after the run-in (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Adding UMEC to FF/VI provides greater improvement in lung function, 
indicating that triple therapy is a suitable regular treatment for ACO.

DOI: 10.5414/CP203382
PMCID: PMC6637394
PMID: 31232275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Family Med Prim Care. 2019 Aug 28;8(8):2644-2650. doi: 
10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_477_19. eCollection 2019 Aug.

COPD from an everyday primary care point of view.

Aguilar-Shea AL(1), Bonis J(2).

Author information:
(1)Family Physician, Centro de Salud Puerta de Madrid, Atención Primaria de 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Base de Datos para la Investigación Farmacoepidemiológica en Atención 
Primaria, Spanish Agency of Medicines and Medical Devices, Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this study is to use real world evidence on 
treatment use to evaluate drug superiority within the same treatment group.
METHODS: Retrospective cohort analysis using the Spanish Database for 
Pharmacoepidemiological Research in Primary Care (BIFAP). Data includes 
longitudinal routine clinical data extracted from practice records of 7,890,485 
patients. All subjects with an incident diagnosis of COPD in the database BIFAP 
between January 1 2010 and December 31 2012 were included in the cohort study. 
Cox regression analysis was performed to compare the hazard of COPD exacerbation 
outcome of the four principal cohorts (no therapy, monotherapy, double therapies 
with and without corticoids, and triple therapy) and within each principal 
cohort between the different treatment combinations.
RESULTS: 27,739 patients with COPD were included in the analysis. The median age 
was 64 years, male proportion was 69% and 70% were smokers. 58,042.9 
person--years of follow-up were obtained for the cohort with a mean follow-up of 
2.09 years per subject. The strongest factor associated with an increased risk 
of exacerbation was suffering an exacerbation the previous year (HR = 
1.82[1.76--1.87 95%CI]). No differences were found between the most frequent 
monotherapies, double therapies without corticoid, or triple therapy. When 
comparing the different combinations of double therapies with corticoid, 
salmeterol/fluticasone combination (HR = 1.16[1.08--1.24]) revealed a higher 
adjusted hazard of exacerbation when compared with formoterol/budesonide.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with a combination of budesonide/formoterol was 
associated with lower exacerbations than the treatment with 
fluticasone/salmeterol. The analysis did not reveal any differences in terms of 
exacerbation in monotherapy, double therapy without corticoids, and triple 
therapy combinations.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_477_19
PMCID: PMC6753803
PMID: 31548948

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


390. Clin Respir J. 2019 Apr;13(4):247-255. doi: 10.1111/crj.13006. Epub 2019 Mar 10.

Higher serum levels of systemic inflammatory markers are linked to greater 
inspiratory muscle dysfunction in COPD.

Formiga MF(1)(2)(3), Vital I(3), Urdaneta G(3), Masters B(4), Herrera J(4), 
Campos MA(3)(5), Cahalin LP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Coral Gables, Florida.
(2)CAPES Foundation, Ministry of Education of Brazil, Brasilia, Brazil.
(3)Pulmonary Section, Miami Veterans Administration Medical Center, Miami, 
Florida.
(4)ProterixBio Inc., Billerica, Massachusetts.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University 
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with an 
inflammatory response that becomes more pronounced in acute exacerbations. 
Considerable attention has recently focused on the value of several inflammatory 
mediators in predicting worsening of COPD-related symptoms. Whereas respiratory 
muscle dysfunction is also widely present in this population, little is known 
about how systemic inflammation relates to inspiratory muscle dysfunction in 
COPD.
METHODS: Fifty-three males with mild-to-very severe airflow obstruction 
underwent blood sampling for 23 inflammatory markers, including acute-phase 
proteins, cytokines and adipokines. Inspiratory muscle performance was assessed 
via the test of incremental respiratory endurance, providing measures of maximal 
(MIP) and sustained maximal (SMIP) inspiratory pressures.
RESULTS: The mean ± SD MIP and SMIP were 75.32 ± 19.62 cmH2 O and 
406.15 ± 124.55 PTU. MIP negatively correlated with CRP, SAA and cystatin C 
(r-values from -0.333 to -0.378, P < 0.02), while SMIP was inversely related to 
SAA and cystatin C (r = -0.534 and r = -0.396, P = 0.00). Significant 
differences in CRP, SAA, cystatin C and PARC were also found between subjects 
with and without inspiratory muscle weakness. No additional significant 
relationships were observed between either MIP or SMIP and other inflammatory 
markers in the study.
CONCLUSIONS: MIP and SMIP are markedly reduced with greater degrees of 
inflammation in COPD as expressed by higher levels of CRP, SAA and cystatin C. 
Future research is needed to further examine the above findings and determine 
the impact of systemic inflammation along with its underlying mechanisms on 
inspiratory muscle function in COPD.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13006
PMID: 30773817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Rev Mal Respir. 2019 Jan;36(1):7-14. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2017.12.005. Epub 2019 
Jan 3.

[The impact of acute exacerbations of COPD on mortality].

[Article in French]

Oussedik F(1), Khelafi R(2), Skander F(2).

Author information:
(1)Service de pneumologie B, CHU Beni-Messous, université d'Alger 1, Alger, 
Algérie. Electronic address: f.oussedik@yahoo.fr.
(2)Service de pneumologie B, CHU Beni-Messous, université d'Alger 1, Alger, 
Algérie.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of the study was to evaluate the impact of acute 
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) on mortality and 
to identify the predictive factors in the Algerian population where COPD occurs 
as frequently as in the rest of the world.
METHODS: An observational study of a cohort of 400 patients with an established 
diagnosis of COPD was performed in the pulmonology department of the University 
of Algiers. The patients were divided into two groups according to the number of 
exacerbations they experienced and were followed prospectively for 3 years. 
Mortality was analyzed comparatively in both groups.
RESULTS: During the follow-up period 39 patients died, mainly frequent 
exacerbators (84.6%), with a high mortality occurring during and in the months 
following hospitalisation (69.2%). By multivariate analysis the phenotype 
"frequent exacerbator" (RR=6.20; 95% CI: 2.6 to 14.8), GOLD category C (RR=7; 
95% CI: 1.28 to 14.7), GOLD category D (RR=7.11; 95% CI: 1.38 to 15.6), 
age≥80 years (RR=2.7, 95% CI: 2.23 to 3.76) and chronic core pulmonale (RR=2.35; 
95% CI 1.05 to 5.25) were shown to be independent risk factors of death.
CONCLUSION: The frequency and the severity of exacerbations impact negatively on 
the survival of patients with COPD.

Copyright © 2018 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2017.12.005
PMID: 30612748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Jul 11;14:1549-1557. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S192047. eCollection 2019.

Effects of air pollution on acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: a descriptive retrospective study (pol-AECOPD).

Morantes-Caballero JA(1), Fajardo Rodriguez HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Universidad Nacional De 
Colombia, Hospital Universitario Nacional De Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia.

PURPOSE: Acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) is among the most frequent causes 
for hospital admission, causing morbidity and mortality. Infection is the most 
frequent cause, and studies on pollution have shown higher hospital admission 
and mortality with inconsistent results. The objective was to identify if there 
is a change in levels of particulate matter (PM) during the days leading up to 
the symptom onset.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective study was carried out on medical records 
of patients with AECOPD from a University Hospital. PM values of the 
consultation day, onset symptoms, and up to three previous days were recorded. 
Moreover, clinical presentation, laboratory findings, treatments, and hospital 
outcomes were recorded.
RESULTS: A total of 250 medical records were included, mean age of 77 years, 
hospital stay mean of 6.7 days, 26.8% with no previous exposure was identified, 
coexistence with asthma was 5%, Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome 15%, Pulmonary 
Hypertension 34%, antibiotic use 62%, ICU admission of 14% with non-invasive 
mechanical ventilation of 68%, and in-patient mortality of 2.4%. PM 2.5 of 48 
hrs before onset symptoms median was 20.1 μg/m3 versus 15 and 16.5 for the day 
of symptoms and 3 days prior to onset symptoms (p<0.001). PM 10 of 46.65 μg/m3, 
versus 39 and 35.6, respectively (p<0.001). Expectoration OR 4.74; Purulence OR 
6.58; Pleuritic pain OR 3.62; Antibiotic use OR 2.87, and corticoids use OR 
2.62, all with p<0.05.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with AECOPD have a higher median of particulate matter 48 
hrs prior to symptomatic onset, as well as greater use of antibiotics and 
corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S192047
PMCID: PMC6628952
PMID: 31371940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


393. Lung. 2019 Feb;197(1):29-35. doi: 10.1007/s00408-018-0176-9. Epub 2018 Oct 31.

High Serum Fractalkine/CX3CL1 in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease: Relationship with Emphysema Severity and Frequent Exacerbation.

Hao W(1)(2), Li M(3), Zhang C(4), Zhang Y(4), Xue Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. 
hwdokgood@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Yan'an 
University, Yan'an, 716099, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. 
hwdokgood@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Yan'an 
University, Yan'an, 716099, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between 
serum fractalkine (CX3CL1/FKN) level and the multi-slice spiral computed 
tomography (MSCT) emphysema index in Chinese patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: We detected chemokine CX3CL1 in serum from 95 Chinese patients with 
COPD by using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. According to the MSCT 
emphysema index, the selected cases were divided into an emphysema-dominant 
group (n = 25) and a non-emphysema-dominant group (n = 70).
RESULTS: There were significant differences in body mass index and lung function 
between the two groups. The serum level of CX3CL1 in the emphysema-dominant 
group was significantly higher than that in the non-emphysema-dominant group. 
Through multivariate logistic regression analysis, it was found that high serum 
CX3CL1 levels were independently associated with emphysema, with a relative risk 
of 2.617 (95% CI 1.018-6.121; P = 0.029). The percentage of frequent acute 
exacerbations during the first year of follow-up was significantly higher in the 
high-level serum CX3CL1 group (P = 0.039). After 3 years of follow-up, there was 
no significant difference in the CT emphysema index between the high and low 
serum CX3CL1 groups (P = 0.503).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the serum level of CX3CL1 is related to the 
MSCT emphysema index. Chemokine CX3CL1 might be a useful predictor for 
identifying frequent exacerbation and emphysema severity in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-018-0176-9
PMID: 30382361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Clin Drug Investig. 2019 Jul;39(7):653-664. doi: 10.1007/s40261-019-00787-4.

Effectiveness of an Intervention to Improve Management of COPD using the AUDIT 
Methodology: Results of the Neumo-Advance Study.

de Miguel-Díez J(1), Jiménez-García R(2), López de Andrés A(2), Zaragoza Arnáez 
F(3).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Department, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM), Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón (IiSGM), C/Dr. Esquerdo, 46, 28007, 
Madrid, Spain. javier.miguel@salud.madrid.org.
(2)Preventive Medicine and Public Health Teaching and Research Unit, Health 
Sciences Faculty, Rey Juan Carlos University, Avenida de Atenas S/n, 28922, 
Alcorcón, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Laboratorios Farmacéuticos ROVI, C/José Isbert 2, 28223, Pozuelo de Alarcón, 
Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The implementation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) guidelines in the real-world setting remains low. Pulmonologists 
should participate in the new paradigms of chronicity of COPD, by providing 
their knowledge, expertise, innovation and research. The objective of this study 
was to survey pulmonologists on the adherence to COPD guidelines and to measure 
the change of attitude after holding meetings presenting the latest research on 
the subject.
METHODS: Fifty questions on COPD management were sent to 150 pulmonologists. 
Using the AUDIT methodology, the responses were discussed at several 
face-to-face meetings, held in different autonomous communities of Spain. The 
same questionnaire was subsequently sent to the participants and changes in 
their responses were analysed.
RESULTS: In total, 148 physicians (60.1% female) completed study. The main 
responses were: (1) 16.2% diagnose following clinical criteria; (2) 78.4% 
performed diagnostic tests other than spirometry; (3) 73.6% always determined 
alpha-1 antitrypsin levels (81.8% in the second questionnaire, p < 0.05); (4) 
73% determined the patient's phenotype; (5) 42% always asked about passive 
exposure to cigarette smoke (55% after the meetings, p < 0.05); (6) 58.1% always 
asked about exposure to other pollutants or biomass; (7) 29.1% always assessed 
inhalational technique; (8) dual bronchodilators were the most common treatment 
(49.3%) used for patients with frequent exacerbator phenotype, 
glycopyrronium + indacaterol being the preferred option (44.1%); (9) 41.2% 
discontinued inhaled corticosteroids treatment (54.7% in the second 
questionnaire, p < 0.05); (10) for exacerbation admissions, 52% replaced 
maintenance bronchodilators with short-acting agents and introduced early 
background treatment (58.8% in the second round, p < 0.05). Few variations 
occurred in the participants' answers after the meetings.
CONCLUSIONS: The adherence of pulmonologists to clinical practice 
recommendations for COPD management is suboptimal. As well as face-to-face 
meetings, more intensive interventions are required to raise awareness on the 
importance of improving compliance with clinical guidelines.

DOI: 10.1007/s40261-019-00787-4
PMID: 31037610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Respir Res. 2019 Jul 8;20(1):141. doi: 10.1186/s12931-019-1108-9.

Weighing the evidence for pharmacological treatment interventions in mild COPD; 
a narrative perspective.

Singh D(1), D'Urzo AD(2), Donohue JF(3), Kerwin EM(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Manchester, Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester University 
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, M23 9QZ, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(2)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Diseases & Critical Care Medicine, University of North 
Carolina Pulmonary Critical Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(4)Clinical Research Institute, Medford, Oregon, USA.

There is increasing focus on understanding the nature of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) during the earlier stages. Mild COPD (Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD] stage 1 or the now-withdrawn GOLD 
stage 0) represents an early stage of COPD that may progress to more severe 
disease. This review summarises the disease burden of patients with mild COPD 
and discusses the evidence for treatment intervention in this subgroup.Overall, 
patients with mild COPD suffer a substantial disease burden that includes 
persistent or potentially debilitating symptoms, increased risk of 
exacerbations, increased healthcare utilisation, reduced exercise tolerance and 
physical activity, and a higher rate of lung function decline versus controls. 
However, the evidence for treatment efficacy in these patients is limited due to 
their frequent exclusion from clinical trials. Careful assessment of disease 
burden and the rate of disease progression in individual patients, rather than a 
reliance on spirometry data, may identify patients who could benefit from 
earlier treatment intervention.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-019-1108-9
PMCID: PMC6615221
PMID: 31286970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DS has received research, consulting and 
lecturing fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, Genentech, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, Menarini, Mundipharma, Novartis, Peptinnovate, 
Pfizer, Pulmatrix, Therevance, and Verona. AD has received research, consulting 
and lecturing fees from Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada), and Novartis Canada. JD 
has received research, consulting and lecturing fees from AstraZeneca, GSK, 
Mylan, Sunovion, and Theravance. EK has received research, consulting and 
lecturing fees from Amphastar, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Crisor LLC 
Research, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, Novartis, Oriel, Pearl, Sunovion, Teva, and 
Theravance.


396. Drugs Real World Outcomes. 2020 Mar;7(1):1-17. doi: 10.1007/s40801-019-00171-w.

Comparative Causal Analysis of the Effects of Long-Acting Muscarinic Antagonist 
Versus No Long-Acting Bronchodilator Use on Readmission or Mortality After 
Hospitalization for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Roberts MH(1), Mapel DW(2), Petersen H(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico, MSC09 5360, Albuquerque, NM, 
87131-0001, USA. MHRoberts@salud.unm.edu.
(2)College of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico, MSC09 5360, Albuquerque, NM, 
87131-0001, USA.
(3)Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, NM, USA.

BACKGROUND: Retrospective observational studies may provide real-world evidence 
about long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist (LAMA) effectiveness in 
reducing mortality or COPD-related readmission risk after a COPD 
hospitalization. Causal inference and competing risk statistical procedures aid 
in managing confounding and competing outcome events that complicate 
retrospective analyses.
OBJECTIVE: To compare COPD-related readmission and mortality risk among patients 
receiving a LAMA versus patients receiving no long-acting bronchodilator ("no 
LABD") within 30 days post-discharge.
METHODS: This retrospective observational analysis of patients (aged ≥ 40 years) 
hospitalized for COPD used claims data (years 2004-2012). Events occurring 
during the period from 31 days through 12 months post-discharge were compared. 
The hazard ratio (HR) for the combined outcome of COPD-related readmission or 
mortality was estimated using Cox regression. Confounding was addressed using 
inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW). The competing risk of 
non-COPD-related readmission was considered.
RESULTS: 10,405 COPD patients were included (LAMA = 751, no LABD = 9654). IPTW 
achieved a balanced sample (10,518 LAMA, 10,405 no LABD). Unweighted HR (LAMA vs 
no LABD) for COPD-related readmission or death, adjusted for age, sex, 
comorbidities, and baseline utilization, was 1.00 [95% confidence interval (CI) 
0.84, 1.20]. Weighted (IPTW) adjusted HR was 0.94 (95% CI 0.88, 1.00). 
Unweighted and weighted HRs further adjusted for competing risk were 0.97 (95% 
CI 0.82, 1.16) and 0.91 (0.86, 0.98), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Bias by indication and comorbidities make the measurement of 
retrospective COPD treatment effectiveness difficult. Using IPTW and 
additionally considering the competing event risk, LAMA use was associated with 
a small reduction in risk for COPD-related readmission or death over the period 
from 31 days to 12 months post-discharge.

DOI: 10.1007/s40801-019-00171-w
PMCID: PMC7060983
PMID: 31792873

Conflict of interest statement: M. Roberts received grant funding from 
Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals for this study. She has additionally 
received grant funding (outside of this study) from GlaxoSmithKline, 
AstraZeneca, Pfizer, and Endo Pharmaceuticals. D. Mapel received grant funding 
from Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals for this study and has served as 
consultant to Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, and 
Theravance Biopharma. H. Petersen is retired from Lovelace Respiratory Research 
Institute and reports no conflict of interest.


397. Front Immunol. 2020 May 15;11:974. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00974. eCollection 
2020.

Airway Epithelial Cell Immunity Is Delayed During Rhinovirus Infection in Asthma 
and COPD.

Veerati PC(1)(2), Troy NM(3), Reid AT(1)(2), Li NF(2)(4), Nichol KS(1)(2), Kaur 
P(5), Maltby S(2)(4), Wark PAB(1)(2)(6), Knight DA(2)(4)(7)(8), Bosco A(3), 
Grainge CL(1)(2)(6), Bartlett NW(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, 
NSW, Australia.
(2)Priority Research Centre for Healthy Lungs, Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, University of Newcastle, New Lambton Heights, NSW, Australia.
(3)Systems Immunology, Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, 
Perth, WA, Australia.
(4)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, University of Newcastle, 
Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(5)UWA School of Agriculture and Environment, Faculty of Science, The University 
of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia.
(6)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, John Hunter Hospital, New 
Lambton Heights, NSW, Australia.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology, Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(8)Research and Academic Affairs, Providence Health Care Research Institute, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Respiratory viral infections, particularly those caused by rhinovirus, 
exacerbate chronic respiratory inflammatory diseases, such as asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Airway epithelial cells are the primary 
site of rhinovirus replication and responsible of initiating the host immune 
response to infection. Numerous studies have reported that the anti-viral innate 
immune response (including type I and type III interferon) in asthma is less 
effective or deficient leading to the conclusion that epithelial innate immunity 
is a key determinant of disease severity during a rhinovirus induced 
exacerbation. However, deficient rhinovirus-induced epithelial interferon 
production in asthma has not always been observed. We hypothesized that 
disparate in vitro airway epithelial infection models using high multiplicity of 
infection (MOI) and lacking genome-wide, time course analyses have obscured the 
role of epithelial innate anti-viral immunity in asthma and COPD. To address 
this, we developed a low MOI rhinovirus model of differentiated primary 
epithelial cells obtained from healthy, asthma and COPD donors. Using 
genome-wide gene expression following infection, we demonstrated that gene 
expression patterns are similar across patient groups, but that the kinetics of 
induction are delayed in cells obtained from asthma and COPD donors. 
Rhinovirus-induced innate immune responses were defined by interferons (type-I, 
II, and III), interferon response factors (IRF1, IRF3, and IRF7), TLR signaling 
and NF-κB and STAT1 activation. Induced gene expression was evident at 24 h and 
peaked at 48 h post-infection in cells from healthy subjects. In contrast, in 
cells from donors with asthma or COPD induction was maximal at or beyond 72-96 h 
post-infection. Thus, we propose that propensity for viral exacerbations of 
asthma and COPD relate to delayed (rather than deficient) expression of 
epithelial cell innate anti-viral immune genes which in turns leads to a delayed 
and ultimately more inflammatory host immune response.

Copyright © 2020 Veerati, Troy, Reid, Li, Nichol, Kaur, Maltby, Wark, Knight, 
Bosco, Grainge and Bartlett.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00974
PMCID: PMC7243842
PMID: 32499788


398. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Oct 11;14:2343-2354. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S204388. eCollection 2019.

Improvement In Self-Reported Physical Functioning With Tiotropium/Olodaterol In 
Central And Eastern European COPD Patients.

Valipour A(1), Tamm M(2), Kociánová J(3), Bayer V(4), Sanzharovskaya M(5), 
Medvedchikov A(6), Haaksma-Herczegh M(6), Mucsi J(7), Fridlender Z(8), Toma 
C(9)(10), Belevskiy A(11), Matula B(12), Šorli J(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 
Karl-Landsteiner-Institute for Lung Research and Pulmonary Oncology, Krankenhaus 
Nord - Klinik Floridsdorf, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Lung Centre/Pneumology Department, University Hospital Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)Pneumological Outpatient Department, MephaCentrum, a.s., Ostrava-Poruba, 
Czech Republic.
(4)Biostatistics and Data Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 
Ridgefield, CT, USA.
(5)Respiratory TA, Boehringer Ingelheim RCV GmbH & Co. KG, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Medical Affairs Regional Center, Boehringer Ingelheim RCV GmbH & Co. KG, 
Vienna, Austria.
(7)Elizabeth Nursing Home, Gödöllő, Hungary.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(9)Department of Pneumology, Institute of Pneumatology "Marius Nasta", 
Bucharest, Romania.
(10)Department Of Pneumology, Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Bucharest, Romania.
(11)Department of Pulmonology, Pirogov Russian National Research Medical 
University, Pletnev Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(12)Department of Functional Diagnostics, Specialized Hospital of Saint 
Zoerardus, Teaching Facility of the Slovak Medical University, Nitra, Slovakia.
(13)Topolšica Hospital, Topolšica, Slovenia.

BACKGROUND: Reduced physical activity is associated with increased morbidity and 
mortality in patients with COPD. Studies suggest that treatment with the 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist tiotropium and the long-acting β2-agonist 
olodaterol increases exercise capacity. This study assessed the effects of a 
fixed-dose combination (FDC) of tiotropium/olodaterol (delivered via Respimat®) 
on physical functioning in patients with stable COPD in a "real-world setting".
METHODS: An international, open-label, single-arm, non-interventional study 
conducted in nine countries measuring changes in self-reported physical 
functioning in COPD patients treated with tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg FDC for 
approximately 6 weeks. The primary endpoint was therapeutic success, defined as 
a minimum 10-point increase in the 10-question Physical Functioning 
Questionnaire (PF-10) score. Secondary endpoints included absolute change in 
PF-10 from Visit 1 to Visit 2, patient general condition (measured by 
Physician's Global Evaluation score) and patient satisfaction with the treatment 
and device (assessed by Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire at the end of the 
study period).
RESULTS: Therapeutic success was observed in 67.8% of 7218 patients (95% CI 
66.7, 68.8) in the final analysis set after approximately 6 weeks of treatment 
with tiotropium/olodaterol. Mean change in PF-10 score between Visit 1 and Visit 
2 was 16.6 points (95% CI 16.2, 17.0). Therapeutic success was 64.3% (95% CI 
63.0-65.6%) in patients with infrequent (≤1) and 76.1% (95% CI 74.3-77.9%) in 
patients with frequent (≥2) exacerbations (p<0.0001). Patient general condition 
improved as indicated by an improvement in Physician's Global Evaluation scores 
between visits. Most patients were very satisfied or satisfied with 
tiotropium/olodaterol treatment in general (81%), reported inhalation 
satisfaction (85%), and satisfactory handling of the device (84%). 1.3% of 
patients reported an investigator-defined drug-related adverse event.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with tiotropium/olodaterol led to an improvement in 
self-reported physical functioning in patients with COPD.

© 2019 Valipour et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S204388
PMCID: PMC6793952
PMID: 31632003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Arschang Valipour reports personal fees, 
non-financial support from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees from Novartis, 
Chiesi, and AstraZeneca, during the conduct of the study. Dr Valentina Bayer, Dr 
Maria Sanzharovskaya, Dr Alexey Medvedchikov are employees of Boehringer 
Ingelheim. Prof. Dr Zvi Fridlender reports personal fees and institutional 
support from Boehringer Ingelheim, during the conduct of the study. Prof Dr. Zvi 
Fridlender also reports personal fees from GSK, Novartis, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Teva, and Rafa, outside the submitted work. Dr Claudia 
Toma reports grants, personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, during the conduct 
of the study, personal fees, non-financial support from AstraZeneca, Berlin 
Chemie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Roche, Sandoz and Chiesi, personal fees 
from Amring, Bayer Pharma, Cipla, and Bristol Myers Squibb, and non-financial 
support from Actelion, Angelini, and Terapia, from outside the submitted work. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


399. Crit Care Med. 2019 Jan;47(1):e14-e20. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000003475.

Risk of Sepsis and Mortality Among Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease Treated With Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors or Angiotensin 
Receptor Blockers.

Lai CC(1), Wang YH(2), Wang CY(3), Wang HC(4), Yu CJ(4), Chen L(5); on the 
behalf of Taiwan Clinical Trial Consortium for Respiratory Diseases (TCORE).

Collaborators: Yu CJ, Wang HC, Perng DW, Cheng SL, Hsu JY, Hsu WH, Tsai YH, 
Hsiue TR, Lin MC, Lin HI, Wang CY, Chang YC, Yang UC, Chen CM, Lin CS, Chen L, 
Wei YF, Chong IW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Chi Mei Medical Center, Liouying, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Medical Research Center, Cardinal Tien Hospital and School of Medicine, 
College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardinal Tien Hospital and School of 
Medicine, College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, 
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and 
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, 
Zhunan, Miaoli County, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to compare the effect of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers on the risk and outcomes of 
sepsis in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DESIGN: A retrospective study.
SETTING: Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database.
PATIENTS: All patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who received 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers for 
more than 90 days between 2000 and 2005 were recruited for this study. Pairwise 
matching (1:1) of the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and angiotensin 
receptor blocker groups resulted in two similar subgroups with 5,959 patients in 
each.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The primary outcome was sepsis, and the secondary 
outcome was death. The occurrence rate of sepsis was 3.67 per 100 person-years 
for the patients receiving angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and 2.87 per 
100 person-years for those receiving angiotensin receptor blockers. In addition, 
the patients receiving angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors had a higher 
risk of septic shock (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.45; 95% CI, 1.26-1.67) and 
mortality (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.31; 95% CI, 1.22-1.40) than those receiving 
angiotensin receptor blockers. No matter whether the patients had prior severe 
exacerbation before the index date, those receiving angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors had a higher risk of sepsis, septic shock, and mortality than 
those receiving angiotensin receptor blockers (all p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Angiotensin receptor blockers were associated with lower rates of 
sepsis and mortality than angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in the 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The similar findings were 
also noted in subgroup analysis.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000003475
PMID: 30303835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Oct 1;200(7):857-868. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201901-0094OC.

Azithromycin during Acute Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Exacerbations 
Requiring Hospitalization (BACE). A Multicenter, Randomized, Double-Blind, 
Placebo-controlled Trial.

Vermeersch K(1)(2), Gabrovska M(3), Aumann J(4), Demedts IK(5), Corhay JL(6), 
Marchand E(7)(8), Slabbynck H(9), Haenebalcke C(10), Haerens M(11), Hanon S(12), 
Jordens P(13), Peché R(14), Fremault A(15), Lauwerier T(16), Delporte A(17), 
Vandenberk B(18), Willems R(18), Everaerts S(1)(2), Belmans A(19)(20), Bogaerts 
K(19)(20), Verleden GM(1)(2), Troosters T(1)(21), Ninane V(3), Brusselle GG(17), 
Janssens W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Chronic Diseases, 
Metabolism and Ageing.
(2)Department of Respiratory Diseases and.
(3)Department of Pneumology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Saint-Pierre, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Department of Pneumology, Jessa Ziekenhuis, Hasselt, Belgium.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, AZ Delta Roeselare-Menen, Roeselare, 
Belgium.
(6)Department of Pneumology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Liège, Belgium.
(7)Department of Pneumology, CHU-UCL-Namur, Yvoir, Belgium.
(8)Faculty of Medicine, NARILIS, Laboratory of Respiratory Physiology, 
University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.
(9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, ZNA Middelheim, Antwerpen, Belgium.
(10)Department of Pneumology, AZ Sint-Jan, Brugge-Oostende, Belgium.
(11)Department of Pneumology, AZ Groeninge, Kortrijk, Belgium.
(12)Department of Pneumology, UZ Brussel, Jette, Belgium.
(13)Department of Pneumology, Onze-Lieve-Vrouw Ziekenhuis, Aalst, Belgium.
(14)Department of Pneumology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Charleroi, 
Charleroi, Belgium.
(15)Department of Pneumology, Grand Hôpital de Charleroi, Charleroi, Belgium.
(16)Department of Pneumology, Imelda Ziekenhuis, Bonheiden, Belgium.
(17)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; and.
(18)Department of Cardiology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(19)I-BioStat, and.
(20)Universiteit Hasselt, Hasselt, Belgium.
(21)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, Faculty of Kinesiology and 
Rehabilitation Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Oct 1;200(7):796-798.
    Ann Intern Med. 2020 Feb 18;172(4):JC21.

Rationale: Azithromycin prevents acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (AECOPDs); however, its value in the treatment of an AECOPD 
requiring hospitalization remains to be defined.Objectives: We investigated 
whether a 3-month intervention with low-dose azithromycin could decrease 
treatment failure (TF) when initiated at hospital admission and added to 
standard care.Methods: In an investigator-initiated, multicenter, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, patients who had been hospitalized for 
an AECOPD and had a smoking history of ≥10 pack-years and one or more 
exacerbations in the previous year were randomized (1:1) within 48 hours of 
hospital admission to azithromycin or placebo. The study drug (500 mg/d for 3 d) 
was administered on top of a standardized acute treatment of systemic 
corticosteroids and antibiotics, and subsequently continued for 3 months (250 
mg/2 d). The patients were followed for 6 months thereafter. Time-to-first-event 
analyses evaluated the TF rate within 3 months as a novel primary endpoint in 
the intention-to-treat population, with TF defined as the composite of treatment 
intensification with systemic corticosteroids and/or antibiotics, a step-up in 
hospital care or readmission for respiratory reasons, or all-cause 
mortality.Measurements and Main Results: A total of 301 patients were randomized 
to azithromycin (n = 147) or placebo (n = 154). The TF rate within 3 months was 
49% in the azithromycin group and 60% in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.73; 
95% confidence interval, 0.53-1.01; P = 0.0526). Treatment intensification, 
step-up in hospital care, and mortality rates within 3 months were 47% versus 
60% (P = 0.0272), 13% versus 28% (P = 0.0024), and 2% versus 4% (P = 0.5075) in 
the azithromycin and placebo groups, respectively. Clinical benefits were lost 6 
months after withdrawal.Conclusions: Three months of azithromycin for an 
infectious AECOPD requiring hospitalization may significantly reduce TF during 
the highest-risk period. Prolonged treatment seems to be necessary to maintain 
clinical benefits.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201901-0094OC
PMID: 31046405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Respir Res. 2020 May 29;21(1):131. doi: 10.1186/s12931-020-01360-w.

Once-daily single-inhaler versus twice-daily multiple-inhaler triple therapy in 
patients with COPD: lung function and health status results from two replicate 
randomized controlled trials.

Ferguson GT(1), Brown N(2), Compton C(3), Corbridge TC(4)(5), Dorais K(6), 
Fogarty C(7), Harvey C(2), Kaisermann MC(6), Lipson DA(6)(8), Martin N(3)(9), 
Sciurba F(10), Stiegler M(4)(11), Zhu CQ(2), Bernstein D(12).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(5)Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA, USA.
(7)Spartanburg Medical Research, Spartanburg, SC, USA.
(8)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(9)University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(10)University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(11)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(12)Bernstein Clinical Research Center and Division of Immunology, Allergy and 
Rheumatology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA. 
bernstdd@ucmail.uc.edu.

BACKGROUND: The comparative efficacy of inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist/long-acting β2-agonist (ICS/LAMA/LABA) triple therapy 
administered via single or multiple inhalers in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has not been evaluated comprehensively. We 
conducted two replicate trials comparing single- with multiple-inhaler 
ICS/LAMA/LABA combination in COPD.
METHODS: 207608 and 207609 were Phase IV, 12-week, randomized, double-blind, 
triple-dummy non-inferiority trials comparing once-daily fluticasone 
furoate/umeclidinium/vilanterol (FF/UMEC/VI) 100/62.5/25 μg via Ellipta inhaler, 
with twice-daily budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FOR) 400/12 μg via metered-dose 
inhaler plus once-daily tiotropium (TIO) 18 μg via HandiHaler. Patients had 
symptomatic COPD and forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) < 50% predicted, or 
FEV1 < 80% predicted and ≥ 2 moderate or 1 severe exacerbations in the prior 
year. The primary endpoint in both trials was weighted mean change from baseline 
(wmCFB) in 0-24-h FEV1 at Week 12. Secondary endpoints included CFB in trough 
FEV1 at Day 84 and 85. Other endpoints included serial FEV1 and health status 
outcomes at Week 12. Safety was evaluated descriptively.
RESULTS: The modified per-protocol population included 720 and 711 patients in 
studies 207608 and 207609 (intent-to-treat population: 728 and 732). FF/UMEC/VI 
was non-inferior to BUD/FOR+TIO for wmCFB in 0-24-h FEV1 at Week 12 (Study 
207608 treatment difference [95% confidence interval]: 15 mL [- 13, 43]; Study 
207609: 11 mL [- 20, 41]). FF/UMEC/VI improved trough FEV1 CFB versus 
BUD/FOR+TIO at Day 84 and 85 (Day 85 treatment difference: Study 207608: 38 mL 
[10, 66]; Study 207609: 51 mL [21, 82]) and FEV1 at 12 and 24 h post-morning 
dose at Week 12 in both studies. No treatment differences were seen in health 
status outcomes. Safety profiles were similar between treatments; pneumonia 
occurred in 7 (< 1%) patients with FF/UMEC/VI and 9 (1%) patients with 
BUD/FOR+TIO, across both studies.
CONCLUSIONS: FF/UMEC/VI was non-inferior to BUD/FOR+TIO for wmCFB in 0-24-h FEV1 
at Week 12 in patients with COPD. Greater improvements in trough and serial FEV1 
measurements at Week 12 with FF/UMEC/VI versus BUD/FOR+TIO, together with 
similar health status improvements and safety outcomes including the incidence 
of pneumonia, suggest that once-daily single-inhaler FF/UMEC/VI triple therapy 
is a viable option for patients looking to simplify their treatment regimen.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: GSK (207608/207609; NCT03478683/NCT03478696).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-020-01360-w
PMCID: PMC7257245
PMID: 32471423

Conflict of interest statement: N Brown, C Compton, TC Corbridge, K Dorais, C 
Harvey, MC Kaisermann, DA Lipson, N Martin, M Stiegler, and C-Q Zhu are 
employees of GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and are shareholders in GSK. GT Ferguson 
received grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Novartis, AstraZeneca, Pearl Therapeutics, Sunovion, Theravance, and 
GSK, grants and personal fees from Verona, and Sanofi, and personal fees from 
Mylan, Innoviva, and Circassia, and grants from Altavant, unrelated to this 
work. C Fogarty has nothing to disclose. F Sciurba received research support 
from the COPD Foundation, Department of Defense Beta Blocker, Gala Therapeutics, 
Inc., GSK, NIH, Nuvaira, PCORI, PneumRX, Inc., PulmonX, and ResMed Corp, 
participated in advisory board for GSK, PneumRX, Inc., Theravance, and Verona 
and previously received research support from Astellas and AstraZeneca, 
unrelated to this work. D Bernstein has received grants and personal fees from 
GSK and ALK America, grants from Aimmune, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Genentech, Merck, 
Mylan, Novartis, Pearl, Shire, Teva, Adare, Knopp, Leo, Mandala, Gossamer, and 
Regeneron, and personal fees from Gerson Lehman, Guidepoint Global, and Covis, 
unrelated to this work.


402. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2020 Apr;7(2):99-106. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.7.2.2019.0154.

Safety and Efficacy of Revefenacin and Formoterol in Sequence and Combination 
via a Standard Jet Nebulizer in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease: A Phase 3b, Randomized, 42-Day Study.

Siler TM(1), Moran EJ(2), Barnes CN(2), Crater GD(2).

Author information:
(1)Midwest Chest Consultants, PC, St Charles, Missouri.
(2)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, California.

Although no nebulized, dual mechanism, long-acting bronchodilator is currently 
marketed, with the approval of once-daily long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) revefenacinefenacin, it is theoretically possible to deliver a LAMA and 
long-acting beta2-agonist via standard jet nebulizer. The primary and secondary 
objectives of our study were to characterize the safety profile of revefenacin 
administered sequentially before or in combination with formoterol, via standard 
jet nebulizer in patients with moderate to very severe chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). In this randomized, double-blind, 42-day trial 
(NCT03573817), patients received revenacin 175 µg (n=63) or placebo (n=59), 
followed by formoterol 20 µg in the morning and formoterol alone in the evening 
formoterol 21 days via standard jet nebulizer (sequential administration). For 
another 21 days, revefenacin/placebo and formoterol, were administered as mixed 
solutions via single nebulization in the morning (combined administration), and 
formoterol alone in the evening. The adverse events' (AEs) incidence was higher 
in the placebo + formoterol arms (11%-12%) than in the revefenacin + formoterol 
arms (5%-8%). The most common AEs were worsening/exacerbation of COPD, cough, 
and dizziness. There were no serious AEs or deaths reported in any arm. The 
least squares mean in trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) versus 
baseline was higher in the revefenacin + formoterol arms (116-157 mL) than in 
the placebo + formoterol arms (35-53 mL). Revefenacin had a safety profile 
similar to formoterol alone when delivered sequentially or combined. Trough FEV1 
was similar when revefenacin was delivered sequentially or combined with 
formoterol, with revefenacin providing an additional 81-104 mL improvements over 
formoterol alone.

JCOPDF © 2020.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.2.2019.0154
PMID: 32324981

Conflict of interest statement: TMS received research support from West-Ward 
Pharmaceuticals, Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., GlaxoSmithKline, Pearl 
Therapeutics, Chiesi, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Forest, 
Compleware, Evidera, Novartis, Oncocyte, Teva, Vapotherm, Sunovion, Proterix 
BioPharma, Seer and Sanofi. He has also received speaker fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan Inc./Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., and Sunovion, and 
consulting fees from Vapotherm. EJM and GDC are current employees of Theravance 
Biopharma US, Inc. CNB was an employee of Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., at the 
time this study was conducted.


403. Semergen. 2019 Oct;45(7):479-488. doi: 10.1016/j.semerg.2019.03.009. Epub 2019 
Sep 17.

[Bronchodilator therapy in the prevention of COPD exacerbations].

[Article in Spanish]

Sobradillo Ecenarro P(1), García-Rivero JL(2), López Caro JC(3).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitario de Cruces, Baracaldo, Vizcaya, 
España. Electronic address: psobradillo@separ.es.
(2)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital de Laredo, Laredo, Cantabria, España.
(3)Médicina de familia, Centro de Salud Cotolino, Castro Urdiales, Cantabria, 
España.

The natural course of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease usually includes 
exacerbations. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients suffer from 1-4 
exacerbations per year on average. These are associated with worsening quality 
of life and increased mortality. Reducing and controlling the number of 
exacerbations is one of the main goals of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
treatment. Among current treatments, tiotropium is the active substance with the 
strongest evidence in the reduction of moderate/severe exacerbations, together 
with a good safety and tolerability profile. The addition of olodaterol to 
tiotropium offers well-tolerated and effective double bronchodilation for 
improving lung function, quality of life, and decreased dyspnoea compared to its 
single components. This also reduces the annual rate of moderate/severe 
exacerbations vs. tiotropium by 7%, although not reaching the pre-specified 
statistical significance level of P<.01.

Copyright © 2019 Sociedad Española de Médicos de Atención Primaria (SEMERGEN). 
Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semerg.2019.03.009
PMID: 31540819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Can Respir J. 2019 Mar 25;2019:3478968. doi: 10.1155/2019/3478968. eCollection 
2019.

Noninvasive Ventilation Weaning in Acute Hypercapnic Respiratory Failure due to 
COPD Exacerbation: A Real-Life Observational Study.

Faverio P(1), Stainer A(1), De Giacomi F(1), Messinesi G(1), Paolini V(1), 
Monzani A(1), Sioli P(1), Memaj I(1), Sibila O(2), Mazzola P(3), Pesci A(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milan Bicocca, Respiratory 
Unit, San Gerardo Hospital, ASST Monza, Monza, Italy.
(2)Respiratory Department, Hospital de La Santa Creu I Sant Pau, Autonomous 
University of Barcelona and Biomedical Research Institute Sant Pau (IIB Sant 
Pau), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milan Bicocca, Acute Geriatrics 
Unit, San Gerardo Hospital, ASST Monza, Monza, Italy.

Comment in
    Can Respir J. 2019 Oct 1;2019:5490510.
    Can Respir J. 2019 Oct 8;2019:4897045.

The most recent British Thoracic Society/Intensive Care Society (BTS/ICS) 
guidelines on the use of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) in acute hypercapnic 
respiratory failure (AHRF) suggest to maximize NIV use in the first 24 hours and 
to perform a slow tapering. However, a limited number of studies evaluated the 
phase of NIV weaning. The aim of this study is to describe the NIV weaning 
protocol used in AHRF due to acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (AE-COPD), patients' characteristics, clinical course, and outcomes in a 
real-life intermediate respiratory care unit (IRCU) setting. We performed a 
retrospective study on adult patients hospitalized at the IRCU of San Gerardo 
Hospital, Monza, Italy, from January 2015 to April 2017 with a diagnosis of AHRF 
due to COPD exacerbation. The NIV weaning protocol used in our institution 
consists of the interruption of one of the three daily NIV sessions at the time, 
starting from the morning session and finishing with the night session. The 51 
patients who started weaning were divided into three groups: 20 (39%) patients 
(median age 80 yrs, 65% males) who completed the protocol and were discharged 
home without NIV (Completed Group), 20 (39%) did not complete it because they 
were adapted to domiciliary ventilation (Chronic NIV Group), and 11 (22%) 
interrupted weaning ex abrupto mainly due to NIV intolerance (Failed Group). 
Completed Group patients were older, had a higher burden of comorbidities, but a 
lower severity of COPD compared to Chronic NIV Group. Failed Group patients 
experienced higher frequency of delirium after NIV discontinuation. None of the 
patients who completed weaning had AHRF relapse during hospitalization. While 
other NIV weaning methods have been previously described, our study is the first 
to describe a protocol that implies the interruption of a ventilation session at 
the time. The application of a weaning protocol may prevent AHRF relapse in the 
early stages of NIV interruption and in elderly frail patients.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/3478968
PMCID: PMC6452557
PMID: 31019611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Thorac Dis. 2020 Apr;12(4):1561-1569. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2020.02.51.

Treatment with inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Janson C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences: Respiratory, Allergy and Sleep Research, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), treatment with inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICSs) in combination with long acting beta-2-agonists (LABA) or 
LABA/long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) is used in order to reduce 
exacerbations. Treatment with ICS is, however, associated with side effects such 
as oropharyngeal candidiasis, skin thinning or easy bruising and pneumonia. The 
aim of this review was to investigate when to use ICS in COPD and to compare the 
effectiveness and safety of different ICSs. Studies comparing the effect of 
ICS/LABA and LABA/LAMA on exacerbations have shown divergent results, whereas 
most studies comparing ICS/LABA/LAMA (triple therapy) with LABA/LAMA have 
reported fewer exacerbations with triple therapy. Several investigations have 
shown that the number of eosinophils in blood predicts whether a patient will 
benefit from treatment with ICS. There is also data indicating that ICS has a 
small but significant positive effect on lung function decline and decrease 
mortality. There are four observational studies showing a better effect on 
exacerbations with budesonide/formoterol than fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 
and three observational studies showing less risk of pneumonia with budesonide 
than fluticasone propionate. Studies comparing the effect and safety of other 
ICSs such as fluticasone furoate and beclomethasone are too few to draw firm 
conclusions from. In conclusion, ICS together with LABA or LABA/LAMA reduces the 
risk of exacerbations in COPD. The indication of using ICS in COPD is stronger 
if the patient has increased blood eosinophils levels. There are data indicating 
that the choice of ICS matters, with studies showing a better effect-safety 
profile with budesonide compared to fluticasone propionate whereas it is not 
possible to make benefit-risk comparisons between the other licensed ICSs.

2020 Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2020.02.51
PMCID: PMC7212119
PMID: 32395293

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The author has received 
payments for educational activities from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and Teva, and has served on advisory boards 
arranged by AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis 
and Teva.


406. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2019 Jul;144(13):917-921. doi: 10.1055/a-0748-8856. Epub 
2019 Jun 28.

[Therapy control of COPD by Eosinophilic Granulocytes?].

[Article in German]

Magnussen H.

Symptomatic patients with COPD reporting about repeated exacerbations in their 
history (group D according to GOLD recommendations) are treated with dual 
bronchodilation (LAMA/LABA) with potential benefits from additional 
ICS. Eosinophils in peripheral blood are considered as potential biomarkers to 
predict exacerbations. > 300 cells/µL or 4 % of eosinophils in peripheral blood 
are recommended to treat the patients with additional ICS. In clinical practice, 
about 10 - 15 % of patients with COPD are classified as group D according to 
GOLD. < 20 % have increased eosinophils in peripheral blood. Thus, ICS therapy 
should be restricted to a minority of patients with COPD.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0748-8856
PMID: 31252446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die WISDOM-Studie wurde von Boehringer Ingelheim 
unterstützt. Helgo Magnussen erhielt Honorare für Vorträge von Astra Zeneca, 
Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, ndd Medical Technology, Zürich, Schweiz.


407. J Affect Disord. 2019 Jun 15;253:277-284. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2019.05.002. Epub 
2019 May 2.

Effects of statins on anxiety and depression in patients with asthma-chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome.

Yeh JJ(1), Syue SH(2), Lin CL(3), Hsu CY(4), Shae Z(5), Kao CH(6).

Author information:
(1)Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan; Chia 
Nan University of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan, Taiwan; China Medical 
University, Taichung, Taiwan; Mei-Ho University, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
anvin.funlan@msa.hinet.net.
(2)Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan.
(3)Management Office for Health Data, China Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan; College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Medicine, College of 
Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Asia University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Medicine, College of 
Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Nuclear 
Medicine and PET Center, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; 
Department of Bioinformatics and Medical Engineering, Asia University, Taichung, 
Taiwan. Electronic address: d10040@mail.cmuh.org.tw.

BACKGROUND: The effects of statins on anxiety and depression in patients with 
asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome (ACOS) have not 
been reported. This population-based study investigated these effects.
METHODS: Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database between 2000 and 
2010. We enrolled two ACOS cohorts, one of statin users (n = 1252) and one of 
nonstatin users matched by age, sex, and index date (n = 7887). The cumulative 
incidence of anxiety and depression was analyzed using time-dependent Cox 
proportional regression analysis.
RESULTS: After adjustment for multiple confounding factors, including age, sex, 
comorbidities, and medications-statins, inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs), and oral 
steroids (OSs)-the ACOS cohort with statin use had significantly lower risks of 
anxiety and depression (anxiety: adjusted hazard ratio [aHR] = 0.34, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] = 0.28-0.42; depression: aHR = 0.36, 95% 
CI = 0.25-0.53). The aHRs (95% CIs) for statin use with ICSs or OSs were 0.32 
(0.13-0.78) and 0.37 (0.24-0.57), respectively.
CONCLUSION: The ACOS cohort with statin use had lower risks of anxiety and 
depression, regardless of age, sex, commodities, or ICSs and OSs. The incidences 
of anxiety and depression were relatively low among users of statins with ICSs 
or OSs in the ACOS cohort.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2019.05.002
PMID: 31071545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 19;14:2175-2184. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S223002. eCollection 2019.

Imidafenacin, An Orally Active Muscarinic Receptor Antagonist, Improves 
Pulmonary Function In Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A 
Multicenter, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled 3×3 Crossover Phase II 
Trial.

Machida K(#)(1), Kawayama T(#)(2), Kinoshita M(#)(3), Ichinose M(4), Tsuda T(5), 
Takata S(6), Koto H(7), Yoshida M(8), Ashihara Y(9), Kawashima M(10), Suna 
H(10), Inoue H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan.
(2)Division of Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, 
Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume 830-0011, Japan.
(3)Nagata Hospital, Yanagawa 832-0059, Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.
(5)Kirigaoka Tsuda Hospital, Kitakyushu 802-0052 Japan.
(6)Division of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization 
Fukuoka-Higashi Medical Center, Koga 811-3195, Japan.
(7)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Kyushu Central Hospital of the Mutual Aid 
Association of Public School Teachers, Fukuoka 815-8588, Japan.
(8)Division of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Fukuoka 
Hospital, Fukuoka 811-1394, Japan.
(9)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Oita Nakamura Hospital, Oita 870-0022, 
Japan.
(10)ONO Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Osaka 541-8564, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Although long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonists are central to 
the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), inhaled 
medicines may have technical difficulty in some patients and adherence barriers.
METHODS: A multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 3×3 
crossover Phase II trial was performed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of 
oral administration of the antimuscarinic agent imidafenacin in patients with 
COPD. Twenty-seven male COPD patients with % forced expiratory volume in 1 s 
(FEV1) ≥30% and <80% predicted were randomized to single oral dose of 
imidafenacin 0.1 mg, imidafenacin 0.2 mg, or placebo.
RESULTS: Maximum change in FEV1 with both doses of imidafenacin significantly 
improved from baseline to 24 hrs after administration when compared with a 
placebo. Area under the curve in FEV1 during 24 hrs after administration with 
0.2 mg, but not 0.1 mg dose, was significantly improved when compared with a 
placebo, and the improvement was significantly based on dose-dependent manners. 
Plasma imidafenacin level was positively correlated with change in FEV1. All 
subjects with both doses of imidafenacin completed without moderate nor severe 
adverse events.
CONCLUSION: A single oral dose of imidafenacin 0.1 mg or imidafenacin 0.2 mg may 
contribute to the improvement of pulmonary function with excellent safety and 
tolerability in patients with COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: JapicCTI-121760 (Japan Pharmaceutical Information Center - 
Clinical Trials Information [JapicCTI]; 
http://www.clinicaltrials.jp/user/cteSearch_e.jsp).

© 2019 Machida et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S223002
PMCID: PMC6757323
PMID: 31571853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Kinoshita received honoraria from 
GlaxoSmithKline K.K., Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd., Novartis Pharma K.K., Takeda 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., and Astellas Pharma Inc. Dr. Tsuda received honoraria 
from Novartis Pharma K.K., Pfizer Japan Inc., and Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim 
Co. Ltd. Mr. Kawashima and Dr. Suna are full-time employees of Ono 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Japan. Dr. Inoue received research grants from Asahi 
Kasei Corporation, Astellas Pharma Inc., Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co. Ltd., 
Chugai Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Co. Ltd., Eisai Co. 
Ltd., MSD K.K., Nippon Kayaku Co. Ltd., Shionogi & Co. Ltd., Taisho Toyama 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., and Teijin Pharma Ltd.; gave lectures and acted on 
advisory committees for Asahi Kasei Corporation, Astellas Pharma Inc., 
AstraZeneca K.K., Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co. Ltd., Chugai Pharmaceutical 
Co. Ltd., Eisai Co. Ltd., GlaxoSmithKline K.K., Eli Lilly Japan K.K., Kyorin 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., MSD K.K., Meiji Seika Pharma Co. Ltd., Novartis Pharma 
K.K., Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Pfizer Japan Inc., Shionogi & Co. Ltd., 
Taisho Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., and Teijin Pharma Ltd. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this work.


409. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1160:43-52. doi: 10.1007/5584_2019_345.

Sleep Disorders and Adherence to Inhalation Therapy in Patients with Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Chabowski M(1)(2), Łuczak J(3), Dudek K(4), Jankowska-Polańska B(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgical Procedures, Department of Clinical Nursing, Faculty of 
Health Science, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. 
mariusz.chabowski@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Surgery, Fourth Military Teaching Hospital, Wroclaw, Poland. 
mariusz.chabowski@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Clinical Nursing, Faculty of Health Science, Wroclaw Medical 
University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(4)Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Wroclaw University of Technology, Wroclaw, 
Poland.

Sleep disorders are common in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) and are associated with greater disease severity, more frequent 
exacerbations, greater use of emergency health care, and higher mortality. They 
may contribute to worsening of COPD course by reducing patients' adherence to 
treatment. The aim of this study was to evaluate quality of sleep in COPD 
patients and to assess the relationship between impaired sleep and adherence to 
inhalation therapy. The study included 106 COPD patients who were asked to 
answer the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), Epworth Sleepiness Scale 
(ESS), and Adherence to Refills and Medications Scale (ARMS). Clinical and 
demographic data were also collected. We found that over 60% of patients 
presented with sleep disorders (PSQI ≥5) and 75% with daytime sleepiness. None 
of the patients presented with optimal adherence to pharmacotherapy. Worse 
adherence was correlated with greater sleep disorders (r = 0.56; p < 0.001). 
ARMS questionnaire proved to be of high overall internal consistency (Cronbach's 
alpha = 0.85). In conclusion, poor quality of sleep coexists with poor adherence 
to treatment among COPD patients. ARMS was proved to be a reliable tool for the 
assessment of adherence. Interventions aimed at improving sleep quality may be 
helpful to improve adherence to inhalation therapy in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/5584_2019_345
PMID: 30746610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Respir Res. 2020 Apr 20;21(1):90. doi: 10.1186/s12931-020-01345-9.

Endothelial dysfunction is not a predictor of outcome in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Scherr A(1), Schumann DM(1), Karakioulaki M(1), Franchetti L(1), Strobel W(1), 
Zellweger M(2), Tamm M(1), Stolz D(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Respiratory Medicine and Pulmonary Cell Research, University 
Hospital of Basel and University of Basel, Petersgraben 4, 4031, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)Clinic of Cardiology, University Hospital Basel, Petersgraben 4, 4031, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)Clinic of Respiratory Medicine and Pulmonary Cell Research, University 
Hospital of Basel and University of Basel, Petersgraben 4, 4031, Basel, 
Switzerland. daiana.stolz@usb.ch.

BACKGROUND: Local airway inflammation may cause systemic changes which result in 
endothelial dysfunction. Only a few studies have used reactive hyperemia 
peripheral arterial tonometry (RH-PAT) in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) in order to measure their endothelial dysfunction.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy of endothelial dysfunction, measured by 
RH-PAT, in assessing disease severity and systemic burden in a cohort of COPD 
patients.
METHODS: In this prospective, monocentric study, 157 patients with moderate to 
very severe COPD (GOLD class II-IV) were examined for endothelial dysfunction 
using RH-PAT (Itamar medical Ltd., Caesarea, Israel). In a nested-cohort, 
examination was repeated at exacerbation. The association between reactive 
hyperemia index (RHI), augmentation index (AI) and disease severity and outcome 
parameters was analysed.
RESULTS: 57% of the COPD patients had a dysfunctional endothelium and the median 
(IQR) RHI was 1.42 (1.27-1.53). Exacerbation of COPD was not associated with a 
significant change in RHI (p = 0.625) or ΑΙ (p = 0.530). None of the diagnostic 
or clinical outcomes of COPD was associated with RHI or arterial stiffness.
CONCLUSION: Endothelial dysfunction is common in COPD. However, it does not seem 
to be a predictor neither of disease severity, nor of outcome and does not 
change during exacerbations of the disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-020-01345-9
PMCID: PMC7168975
PMID: 32312273

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


411. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2020 Jun 27. doi: 10.1080/17512433.2020.1787830. 
Online ahead of print.

The role of triple therapy in the management of COPD.

Calzetta L(1), Matera MG(2), Rogliani P(3), Cazzola M(3).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Disease and Lung Function Department Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Parma , Parma Italy.
(2)Unit of Pharmacology, Department Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli" , Naples, Italy.
(3)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Unit of Pharmacology, Department Experimental 
Medicine, Experimental Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata" , Rome, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Triple therapy in COPD is becoming increasingly important with the 
cumulative documentation of its ability to reduce the risk of AECOPD. However, 
it must be established which patients benefit most from it compared to other 
treatments.
AREAS COVERED: We critically review the literature to determine, if possible, 
the real role of triple therapy in the treatment of COPD. We have identified 
studies from several databases and selected the information thought to be more 
significant.
EXPERT OPINION: It is still unclear whether and when addition of an ICS to the 
LAMA/LABA combination provides real additional clinical value, regardless of a 
preventive effect on exacerbations. There are many doubts about the value of the 
blood eosinophil count as a valid biomarker to predict AECOPD risk and the 
clinical response to ICS, also because no association was found in observational 
studies. In any case, before starting a therapy involving ICS, the risk factors 
for the development of pneumonia must always be evaluated. Adding a LAMA to an 
ICS/LABA combination seems to be less problematic. However, each LABA/LAMA 
combination has a specific efficacy/safety profile that needs to be considered 
for personalized therapy in COPD even in the context of triple therapy.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2020.1787830
PMID: 32597259


412. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Oct;98(40):e17361. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000017361.

Factors associated with appendicular skeletal muscle mass among male Chinese 
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A hospital-based 
cross-sectional study.

Han Y(1), Wu Z(1), Chen Y(1), Kan Y(2), Geng M(2), Xu N(2), Qian H(1), Wang 
HF(1), Niu M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University.
(2)School of Nursing, Soochow University, Suzhou, China.

Limbs muscle wasting is a common disorder in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) that limits daily activities and exercise intolerance, 
especially in males. The present study aimed to estimate the prevalence of 
appendicular skeletal muscle mass (ASM) in male patients with stable COPD. In 
addition, factors associated with parameters of ASM were also investigated.We 
recruited 116 male patients with stable COPD from the outpatient clinic between 
September 2016 and December 2017. For each patient, we obtained demographic 
characteristics and measured post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 
1 second, symptoms, exacerbations history, and ASM. ASM was defined as the sum 
of the muscle masses of the 4 limbs.Appendicular skeletal muscle mass index 
(ASMI) in male patients with stable COPD was 8.2 ± 0.9 kg/m, and the prevalence 
of low skeletal muscle mass was 7.8% (9 of 116 patients). Multiple 
linear-regression analysis showed that body mass index, occupation, fat-free 
mass index, and the modified medical research council scale were significantly 
correlated with ASMI. Compared with nonexercise group, lower limb muscle mass 
and ASM were significantly improved in physical exercise group.Underweight, 
retirement, fat-free mass depletion, and severe dyspnea are all risk factors for 
ASM in male patients with stable COPD. Our findings also justify the importance 
of exercise training in improving ASM.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000017361
PMCID: PMC6783162
PMID: 31577733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


413. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc. 2019 Sep 2;57(5):284-290.

[Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome: 
clinical-functional profile].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Che-Morales JL(1), Valle-Piña J, Carrillo-Chan J.

Author information:
(1)Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Unidad Médica de Atención Ambulatoria 
No. 1, Departamento de Neumología e Inhaloterapia. Mérida, Yucatán, México.

BACKGROUND: Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) affects 1 in 
10 individuals worldwide. Asthma and COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS) have more 
symptoms, exacerbations and worse pulmonary function.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical-functional profile with ACOS who are 
detected in a second level clinic.
METHODS: Retrospective study; 466 patients 18 years and older with COPD and 
asthma with acceptable spirometries were analyzed. ACOS definition proposed by 
Montes de Oca and colleagues was used. Patients were divided in three groups: 
Asthma, COPD and ACOS. Differences were estimated with Chi square and ANOVA with 
Bonferroni´s adjustment.
RESULTS: 79.1% were diagnosed with asthma, 8.1% COPD and 12.6% ACOS. ACOS 
patients were more symptomatic; the exacerbation frequency during the last year 
was greater (Asthma: 24.9% vs. COPD: 15.8% vs. ACOS: 39%; p=0.036); in patients 
with ACOS the magnitude of change in pulmonary function was greater than those 
with asthma (p=0.000). The severity of obstruction was worse among those 
patients with COPD and ACOS. Having medical diagnosis of ACOS, dyspnea mMRC >2 
and ACT <15 increased the probability of exacerbation during last the year.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of ACOS was 12.6% in our group. The patients with 
ACOS had the worst disease control, more frequency of previous exacerbations and 
more severity in lung function.

Publisher: INTRODUCCIÓN: el asma y la enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crónica 
(EPOC) afectan a uno de cada 10 individuos a nivel mundial. Su coexistencia 
(ACOS) se traduce en mayor frecuencia de síntomas, agudizaciones y en peor 
función pulmonar.
OBJETIVO: evaluar el perfil clínico-funcional de los pacientes con sobreposición 
asma-EPOC.
MÉTODOS: estudio transversal y retrospectivo; se analizaron a 466 pacientes 
mayores de 18 años con asma y EPOC con espirometrías aceptables. Se usó la 
definición de ACOS propuesta por Montes de Oca et al. Los pacientes se 
dividieron en tres grupos: asma, EPOC y ACOS. Se estimaron las diferencias con 
Chi cuadrada y ANOVA con ajuste de Bonferroni.
RESULTADOS: el 79.3% de los pacientes tuvo diagnóstico de asma, el 8.1% de EPOC 
y el 12.6% de ACOS. Los pacientes con ACOS fueron más sintomáticos; la 
frecuencia de una exacerbación en el año previo fue significativamente mayor en 
ellos (asma: 24.9% vs. EPOC: 15.8% vs. ACOS: 39%; p = 0.036); En los pacientes 
con ACOS, la magnitud del cambio en función pulmonar fue mayor al compararse con 
los pacientes con asma (p = 0.000). La gravedad de la obstrucción fue mayor 
entre los grupos de EPOC y ACOS (p = 0.000). Tener el diagnóstico de ACOS, 
disnea mMRC > 2 y ACT < 15 otorgaron una probabilidad mayor de exacerbaciones el 
año previo.
CONCLUSIÓN: la prevalencia de ACOS fue de 12.6%. Los pacientes con ACOS tenían 
peor control de la enfermedad, más frecuencia de exacerbaciones previas y mayor 
gravedad de la función pulmonar.

PMID: 32568483


414. BMC Pulm Med. 2019 Jul 12;19(1):127. doi: 10.1186/s12890-019-0882-y.

Randomized controlled trials of pharmacological treatments to prevent COPD 
exacerbations: applicability to real-life patients.

Pahus L(1)(2)(3), Burgel PR(4)(5), Roche N(4)(5), Paillasseur JL(6), Chanez 
P(7)(8); Initiatives BPCO scientific committee.

Author information:
(1)Clinique des bronches allergies et sommeil, Aix Marseille Univ, APHM, CIC 
9502, 13015, Marseille, France. Laurie.Pahus@ap-hm.fr.
(2)ADES, Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, EFS, Marseille, France. 
Laurie.Pahus@ap-hm.fr.
(3)C2VN (INSERM U1263, INRA 1260), Aix Marseille Univ, Marseille, France. 
Laurie.Pahus@ap-hm.fr.
(4)Service de Pneumologie, GH Cochin-Broca-Hôtel Dieu, APHP, Paris, France.
(5)Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(6)EFFI-STAT, Paris, France.
(7)Clinique des bronches allergies et sommeil, Aix Marseille Univ, APHM, CIC 
9502, 13015, Marseille, France.
(8)C2VN (INSERM U1263, INRA 1260), Aix Marseille Univ, Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, all efforts 
should be made to prevent exacerbations because each event modifies the 
trajectory of the disease. Treatment recommendations are mostly built on results 
from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) whose methodology ensure internal 
validity. However, their relevance may be compromised by the lack of 
generalizability, due to poor representability of study populations compared to 
real-life patients. In order to delimit to whom the results of studies on 
current and future treatments apply, we sought to identify and characterize the 
fraction of COPD population that would be eligible for inclusion into RCTs 
aiming at decreasing exacerbation risk.
METHODS: We used the Initiatives-BPCO database, a French cohort of 1309 
real-life COPD patients monitored in academic centers. We identified 
industry-sponsored phase III and IV trials that enrolled more than 500 patients, 
lasted at least one year and used exacerbations related endpoints. Eligibility 
criteria were extracted from each trial and applied to the patients.
RESULTS: The eligibility criteria of 16 RCTs were applied to the 1309 patients. 
The most discriminating eligibility criteria were FEV1, minimum exacerbation 
rate in the previous year and smoking history, responsible for the exclusion of 
39.9, 36.7 and 16.8% of patients, respectively. Altogether, 2.3 to 46.7% of our 
patients would have satisfied all eligibility criteria.
CONCLUSION: These analyses confirm that an important gap exists between 
real-life patients and clinical trials populations in COPD, which limits the 
relevance of results and therefore should be considered when grading levels of 
evidence and designing future studies.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-019-0882-y
PMCID: PMC6625055
PMID: 31299936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LP has no conflicts of interest to report. PRB 
reports personal fees from Astra Zeneca, personal fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, personal fees from Chiesi, personal fees from GSK, personal fees from 
Novartis, personal fees from TEVA, personal fees from Vertex, outside the 
submitted work. NR reports grants and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Novartis, Pfizer and personal fees from Teva, GSK, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, 
Mundipharma, Cipla, Sanofi, Sandoz, 3 M, Zambon outside the submitted work. JLP 
has no conflicts of interest to report. PC, as an advisory board member, 
consultant or lecturer, has previously received honoraria or grants from 
Boehringer Ingeheim, Almirall, Centocor, GSK, MSD, Astra Zeneca, Novartis, Teva, 
Chiesi, Shering Plough and Amu. None of the latter participated in or had any 
influence over the present analysis or manuscript.


415. J Transl Med. 2019 May 20;17(1):162. doi: 10.1186/s12967-019-1898-z.

Values of integration between lipidomics and clinical phenomes in patients with 
acute lung infection, pulmonary embolism, or acute exacerbation of chronic 
pulmonary diseases: a preliminary study.

Gao D(1), Zhang L(1), Song D(2), Lv J(1), Wang L(2), Zhou S(3), Li Y(4), Zeng 
T(5), Zeng Y(6), Zhang J(7), Wang X(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, The First Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Zhongshan Hospital Institute for Clinical Science, Shanghai Institute of 
Clinical Bioinformatics, Shanghai Engineering Research for AI Technology for 
Cardiopulmonary Diseases, Center for Tumor Diagnosis and Therapy, Jinshan 
Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Clinical Center for Molecular Diagnosis and Therapy, The Second Hospital of 
Fujian Medical University, Quanzhou, Fujian, China.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Center for Clinical Single Cell Biomedicine, 
Henan Provincial People's Hospital, People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Chinese Academy Science, Shanghai, China.
(6)Clinical Center for Molecular Diagnosis and Therapy, The Second Hospital of 
Fujian Medical University, Quanzhou, Fujian, China. zeng_yi_ming@126.com.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology, Center for Clinical Single Cell Biomedicine, 
Henan Provincial People's Hospital, People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China. jqzhang@henu.edu.cn.
(8)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, The First Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China. xdwang@fuccb.com.
(9)Zhongshan Hospital Institute for Clinical Science, Shanghai Institute of 
Clinical Bioinformatics, Shanghai Engineering Research for AI Technology for 
Cardiopulmonary Diseases, Center for Tumor Diagnosis and Therapy, Jinshan 
Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 
xdwang@fuccb.com.
(10)Clinical Center for Molecular Diagnosis and Therapy, The Second Hospital of 
Fujian Medical University, Quanzhou, Fujian, China. xdwang@fuccb.com.
(11)Department of Anesthesiology, Center for Clinical Single Cell Biomedicine, 
Henan Provincial People's Hospital, People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China. xdwang@fuccb.com.

BACKGROUND: The morbidity and mortality of patients with critical illnesses 
remain high in pulmonary critical care units and a poorly understood correlation 
between alterations of lipid elements and clinical phenomes remain unelucidated.
METHODS: In the present study, we investigated plasma lipidomic profiles of 30 
patients with severe acute pneumonia (SAP), acute pulmonary embolism (APE), and 
acute exacerbation of chronic pulmonary diseases (AECOPD) or 15 healthy with the 
aim to compare disease specificity of lipidomic patterns. We defined the 
specificity of lipidomic profiles in SAP by comparing it to both APE and AECOPD. 
Analysis of the correlation between altered lipid elements and clinical 
phenotypes using the lipid-QTL model was then carried out.
RESULTS: We integrated lipidomic profiles with clinical phenomes measured by 
score values from the digital evaluation score system and found 
phenome-associated lipid elements to identify disease-specific lipidomic 
profiling. The present study demonstrates that lipidomic profiles of patients 
with acute lung diseases are different from healthy lungs, and there are also 
disease-specific portions of lipidomics among SAP, APE, or AECOPD. The 
comprehensive profiles of clinical phenomes or lipidomics are valuable in 
describing the disease specificity of patient phenomes and lipid elements. The 
combination of clinical phenomes with lipidomic profiles provides more detailed 
disease-specific information on panels of lipid elements When compared to the 
use of each separately.
CONCLUSIONS: Integrating biological functions with disease specificity, we 
believe that clinical lipidomics may create a new alternative way to understand 
lipid-associated mechanisms of critical illnesses and develop a new category of 
disease-specific biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-019-1898-z
PMCID: PMC6528323
PMID: 31109325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


416. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 May 1;5(5):CD002309. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD002309.pub6.

Phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Janjua S(1), Fortescue R(1), Poole P(2).

Author information:
(1)Cochrane Airways, Population Health Research Institute, St George's, 
University of London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Sep 19;9:CD002309.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with 
cough, sputum production or dyspnoea, and a reduction in lung function, quality 
of life, and life expectancy. Apart from smoking cessation, no other treatments 
that slow lung function decline are available. Roflumilast and cilomilast are 
oral phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE₄) inhibitors proposed to reduce the airway 
inflammation and bronchoconstriction seen in COPD. This Cochrane Review was 
first published in 2011, and was updated in 2017 and 2020.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of oral PDE₄ inhibitors for 
management of stable COPD.
SEARCH METHODS: We identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) from the 
Cochrane Airways Trials Register (date of last search 9 March 2020). We found 
other trials at web-based clinical trials registers.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs if they compared oral PDE₄ inhibitors with 
placebo in people with COPD. We allowed co-administration of standard COPD 
therapy.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard Cochrane methods. Two independent 
review authors selected trials for inclusion, extracted data, and assessed risk 
of bias. We resolved discrepancies by involving a third review author. We 
assessed our confidence in the evidence by using GRADE recommendations. Primary 
outcomes were change in lung function (minimally important difference (MID) = 
100 mL) and quality of life (scale 0 to 100; higher score indicates more 
limitations).
MAIN RESULTS: We found 42 RCTs that met the inclusion criteria and were included 
in the analyses for roflumilast (28 trials with 18,046 participants) or 
cilomilast (14 trials with 6457 participants) or tetomilast (1 trial with 84 
participants), with a duration between six weeks and one year or longer. These 
trials included people across international study centres with moderate to very 
severe COPD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
grades II to IV), with mean age of 64 years. We judged risks of selection bias, 
performance bias, and attrition bias as low overall amongst the 39 published and 
unpublished trials. Lung function Treatment with a PDE₄ inhibitor was associated 
with a small, clinically insignificant improvement in forced expiratory volume 
in one second (FEV₁) over a mean of 40 weeks compared with placebo (mean 
difference (MD) 49.33 mL, 95% confidence interval (CI) 44.17 to 54.49; 
participants = 20,815; studies = 29; moderate-certainty evidence). Forced vital 
capacity (FVC) and peak expiratory flow (PEF) were also improved over 40 weeks 
(FVC: MD 86.98 mL, 95% CI 74.65 to 99.31; participants = 22,108; studies = 17; 
high-certainty evidence; PEF: MD 6.54 L/min, 95% CI 3.95 to 9.13; participants = 
4245; studies = 6; low-certainty evidence). Quality of life Trials reported 
improvements in quality of life over a mean of 33 weeks (St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ) MD -1.06 units, 95% CI -1.68 to -0.43; participants = 7645 
; moderate-certainty evidence). Incidence of exacerbations Treatment with a PDE₄ 
inhibitor was associated with a reduced likelihood of COPD exacerbation over a 
mean of 40 weeks (odds ratio (OR) 0.78, 95% CI 0.73 to 0.84; participants = 
20,382; studies = 27; high-certainty evidence), that is, for every 100 people 
treated with PDE₄ inhibitors, five more remained exacerbation-free during the 
study period compared with those given placebo (number needed to treat for an 
additional beneficial outcome (NNTB) 20, 95% CI 16 to 27). No change in 
COPD-related symptoms nor in exercise tolerance was found. Adverse events More 
participants in the treatment groups experienced an adverse effect compared with 
control participants over a mean of 39 weeks (OR 1.30, 95% CI 1.22 to 1.38; 
participants = 21,310; studies = 30; low-certainty evidence). Participants 
experienced a range of gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhoea, nausea, 
vomiting, or dyspepsia. Diarrhoea was more commonly reported with PDE₄ inhibitor 
treatment (OR 3.20, 95% CI 2.74 to 3.50; participants = 20,623; studies = 29; 
high-certainty evidence), that is, for every 100 people treated with PDE₄ 
inhibitors, seven more suffered from diarrhoea during the study period compared 
with those given placebo (number needed to treat for an additional harmful 
outcome (NNTH) 15, 95% CI 13 to 17). The likelihood of psychiatric adverse 
events was higher with roflumilast 500 µg than with placebo (OR 2.13, 95% CI 
1.79 to 2.54; participants = 11,168; studies = 15 (COPD pool data); 
moderate-certainty evidence). Roflumilast in particular was associated with 
weight loss during the trial period and with an increase in insomnia and 
depressive mood symptoms. Participants treated with PDE₄ inhibitors were more 
likely to withdraw from trial participation; on average, 14% in the treatment 
groups withdrew compared with 8% in the control groups. Mortality No effect on 
mortality was found (OR 0.98, 95% CI 0.77 to 1.24; participants = 19,786; 
studies = 27; moderate-certainty evidence), although mortality was a rare event 
during these trials.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: For this current update, five new studies from the 2020 
search contributed to existing findings but made little impact on outcomes 
described in earlier versions of this review. PDE₄ inhibitors offered a small 
benefit over placebo in improving lung function and reducing the likelihood of 
exacerbations in people with COPD; however, they had little impact on quality of 
life or on symptoms. Gastrointestinal adverse effects and weight loss were 
common, and the likelihood of psychiatric symptoms was higher, with roflumilast 
500 µg. The findings of this review provide cautious support for the use of PDE₄ 
inhibitors in COPD. In accordance with GOLD 2020 guidelines, they may have a 
place as add-on therapy for a subgroup of people with persistent symptoms or 
exacerbations despite optimal COPD management (e.g. people whose condition is 
not controlled by fixed-dose long-acting beta₂-agonist (LABA) and inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) combinations). More longer-term trials are needed to 
determine whether or not PDE₄ inhibitors modify FEV₁ decline, hospitalisation, 
or mortality in COPD.

Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD002309.pub6
PMCID: PMC7193764
PMID: 32356609

Conflict of interest statement: Phillippa Poole: none known. Sadia Janjua is 
funded full‐time as a systematic reviewer by a National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR) Programme Grant to complete work on this review. Rebecca 
Fortescue is Co‐ordinating Editor for Cochrane Airways.


417. J Med Internet Res. 2019 Jun 2;21(6):e10924. doi: 10.2196/10924.

Relationship Between Patient-Reported Outcome Measures and the Severity of 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in the Context of an Innovative Digitally 
Supported 24-Hour Service: Longitudinal Study.

Lindskrog S(#)(1), Christensen KB(1), Osborne RH(1)(2), Vingtoft S(3), Phanareth 
K(3), Kayser L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Faculty of Health, Arts and Design, Swinburne University of Technology, 
Hawthorn, Australia.
(3)Region Zeeland, Sorø, Denmark.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) live 
with the burden of a progressive life-threatening condition that is often 
accompanied by anxiety and depression. The severity of the condition is usually 
considered from a clinical perspective and characterized according to the Global 
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) classification of 
severity (1-4) and a risk assessment (A through D) that focuses on the patient's 
symptoms and number of exacerbations, but information about perceived health or 
ability to manage the condition are rarely included.
OBJECTIVE: We evaluated 3 patient-reported outcome measurements (PROMs) to 
examine how these can be used to report on individuals with COPD who were 
supported by a digitally assisted intervention that aims to increase the 
patient's management of their condition to improve their well-being.
METHODS: A total of 93 individuals with COPD were enrolled. At baseline and 
after 6 and 12 months, we measured self-reported self-management (Health 
Education Impact Questionnaire, heiQ) and health literacy (Health Literacy 
Questionnaire, HLQ), and physical and mental health (Short Form-36, SF-36) PROMs 
were collected. The scores of the 19 PROM dimensions were related to COPD 
severity, that is, GOLD risk assessment, pulmonary function at entry, and number 
of exacerbations of a period up to 12 months. The initial PROM scores were also 
compared with pulmonary function, exacerbations, and GOLD risk assessment to 
predict the number of contacts within the first 90 days.
RESULTS: At baseline, 2 dimensions from heiQ and SF-36 Physical health differed 
significantly between GOLD risk factor groups, indicating more distress and 
poorer attitudes and health status with increasing severity (GOLD risk 
assessment). Pulmonary function (FEV1) was negatively associated with the 
severity of the condition. After 6 months, we observed an increase in heiQ6 
(skill and technique acquisition) and a reduction in emotional distress. The 
latter effect persisted after 12 months, where heiQ4 (self-monitoring and 
insight) also increased. HLQ3 (actively managing my health) decreased after 6 
and 12 months. The number of exacerbations and the GOLD risk factor assessment 
predicted the number of contacts during the first 90 days. Furthermore, 2 of the 
PROMS heiQ6 (skill and technique acquisition) and HLQ8 (ability to find good 
health information) evaluated at baseline were associated with the number of 
contacts within the first 90 after enrollment. The pulmonary function was not 
associated with the number of contacts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that selected dimensions from HLQ, heiQ, and SF-36 
can be used as PROMs in relation to COPD to provide researchers and clinicians 
with greater insight into how this condition affects individuals' ability to 
understand and manage their condition and perception of their physical and 
mental health. The PROMs add to the information obtained with the clinical 
characteristics including the GOLD risk factor assessment.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): RR2-10.2196/resprot.6506.

©Signe Lindskrog, Karl Bang Christensen, Richard H Osborne, Søren Vingtoft, 
Klaus Phanareth, Lars Kayser. Originally published in the Journal of Medical 
Internet Research (http://www.jmir.org), 02.06.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/10924
PMCID: PMC6595940
PMID: 31199320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


418. BMC Health Serv Res. 2019 Oct 15;19(1):701. doi: 10.1186/s12913-019-4549-4.

Comorbidity and thirty-day hospital readmission odds in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: a comparison of the Charlson and Elixhauser comorbidity 
indices.

Buhr RG(1)(2)(3), Jackson NJ(4), Kominski GF(5)(6), Dubinett SM(7)(8), Ong 
MK(5)(8)(9), Mangione CM(5)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, 1100 Glendon Ave, Suite 850, Los Angeles, 
CA, 90024, USA. rbuhr@mednet.ucla.edu.
(2)Department of Health Policy and Management, Jonathan and Karin Fielding 
School of Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
rbuhr@mednet.ucla.edu.
(3)Department of Medicine, Greater Los Angeles Veterans Affairs Healthcare 
System, Los Angeles, CA, USA. rbuhr@mednet.ucla.edu.
(4)Department of Medicine Statistics Core, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Health Policy and Management, Jonathan and Karin Fielding 
School of Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Center for Health Policy Research, Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of 
Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, 1100 Glendon Ave, Suite 850, Los Angeles, 
CA, 90024, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Greater Los Angeles Veterans Affairs Healthcare 
System, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(9)Division of General Internal Medicine and Health Services Research, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Readmissions following exacerbations of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) are prevalent and costly. Multimorbidity is common in 
COPD and understanding how comorbidity influences readmission risk will enable 
health systems to manage these complex patients.
OBJECTIVES: We compared two commonly used comorbidity indices published by 
Charlson and Elixhauser regarding their ability to estimate readmission odds in 
COPD and determine which one provided a superior model.
METHODS: We analyzed discharge records for COPD from the Nationwide Readmissions 
Database spanning 2010 to 2016. Inclusion and readmission criteria from the 
Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program were utilized. Elixhauser and Charlson 
Comorbidity Index scores were calculated from published methodology. A 
mixed-effects logistic regression model with random intercepts for hospital 
clusters was fit for each comorbidity index, including year, patient-level, and 
hospital-level covariates to estimate odds of thirty-day readmissions. 
Sensitivity analyses included testing age inclusion thresholds and model 
stability across time.
RESULTS: In analysis of 1.6 million COPD discharges, readmission odds increased 
by 9% for each half standard deviation increase of Charlson Index scores and 13% 
per half standard deviation increase of Elixhauser Index scores. Model fit was 
slightly better for the Elixhauser Index using information criteria. Model 
parameters were stable in our sensitivity analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Both comorbidity indices provide meaningful information in 
prediction readmission odds in COPD with slightly better model fit in the 
Elixhauser model. Incorporation of comorbidity information into risk prediction 
models and hospital discharge planning may be informative to mitigate 
readmissions.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-019-4549-4
PMCID: PMC6794890
PMID: 31615508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RGB received personal consulting fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline, not related to this work. NJJ reports nothing to disclose. GFK 
reports nothing to disclose. SMD is a member of the scientific advisory boards 
of Johnson & Johnson Lung Cancer Initiative, T-cure Bioscience, Cynvenio 
Biosystems, and EarlyDx, Inc., not related to this work. MKO reports nothing to 
disclose. CMM is a member of the United States Preventive Services Task Force 
(USPSTF). This article does not necessarily represent the views and policies of 
the USPSTF. RGB, MKO, and SMD are employed as part-time physicians and 
researchers by the Veterans Health Administration This article does not 
necessarily represent the views and policies of the Department of Veterans 
Affairs.


419. COPD. 2020 Apr;17(2):121-127. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1704231. Epub 2020 Mar 
2.

Fractional Exhaled Nitric Oxide is Associated with the Severity of Stable COPD.

Liu X(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Lu Y(1)(2), Gao Y(3), Lu Y(1)(2), 
Zheng C(4), Yin D(1)(2), Wang S(1)(2), Huang K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Respiratory and Pulmonary Circulation Disorders, 
Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing, PR China.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Institute of 
Respiratory Medicine, Beijing, PR China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, PR China.
(4)The Center for Basic Medical Research, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital 
Medical University, Beijing, PR China.

The value of fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains unclear. We aimed to assess whether 
FeNO is a more valuable biomarker than blood eosinophil count for identifying 
clinical characteristics of COPD. Stable COPD patients (n = 390) were included 
and stratified by FeNO and blood eosinophil counts at recruitment. The 
demographic characteristics, lung functions, St George Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ), serum inhaled allergen-specific IgE and the exacerbations in the 
preceding 12 months were compared. Risk factors for moderate or severe 
exacerbation in the preceding 12 months were examined by binary regression 
analysis. The cross-sectional study showed that 167 patients had high level of 
FeNO (≥25 ppb) and 223 in low level (<25 ppb), while 138 patients had high blood 
eosinophil count (≥200 cells/μL) and 252 had low (<200 cells/μL). Compared with 
the high FeNO group, there were higher proportion of patients with GOLD III-IV, 
higher SGRQ scores, more exacerbations in the preceding 12 months, and with 
lower positive proportion of sIgE in the low FeNO group (p < 0.05 for all). 
However, these phenomena above were not associated with blood eosinophil count. 
Finally, high FeNO level was associated with a lower moderate or severe 
exacerbation in preceding 12 months (RR: 0.541 [95%CI 0.319-0.917], p = 0.023). 
In stable COPD patients, FeNO, but not blood eosinophil count was associated 
with the COPD severity and allergic airway inflammation. However, the role of 
FeNO in guiding personalized treatment of COPD patients need to be further 
investigated.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1704231
PMID: 32116037


420. Respir Investig. 2020 May;58(3):155-168. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2019.12.005. Epub 
2020 Feb 21.

Inhibitory effects of glycopyrronium, formoterol, and budesonide on coronavirus 
HCoV-229E replication and cytokine production by primary cultures of human nasal 
and tracheal epithelial cells.

Yamaya M(1), Nishimura H(2), Deng X(3), Sugawara M(4), Watanabe O(5), Nomura 
K(6), Shimotai Y(7), Momma H(8), Ichinose M(9), Kawase T(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Preventive Medicine for Infectious Disease, Tohoku 
University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: 
myamaya@med.tohoku.ac.jp.
(2)Virus Research Center, Clinical Research Division, Sendai Medical Center, 
Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: hide-nishimura@mte.biglobe.ne.jp.
(3)Department of Advanced Preventive Medicine for Infectious Disease, Tohoku 
University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: 
dengxuexue@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Tohoku Kosai Hospital, Sendai, Japan. 
Electronic address: mi-sugawara@tohokukosai.com.
(5)Virus Research Center, Clinical Research Division, Sendai Medical Center, 
Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: watanabe.oshi.zr@mail.hosp.go.jp.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: 
kazuhiroe@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Infectious Diseases, Yamagata University Faculty of Medicine, 
Yamagata, Japan. Electronic address: yoshimo@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp.
(8)Department of Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: 
harupiyo326@hotmail.com.
(9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: ichinose@rm.med.tohoku.ac.jp.
(10)Laboratory of Rehabilitative Auditory Science, Tohoku University Graduate 
School of Biomedical Engineering, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: 
kawase@orl.med.tohoku.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Coronavirus 229E (HCoV-229E), one of the causes of the common cold, 
exacerbates chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and bronchial asthma. 
Long-acting muscarinic antagonists and β2-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids 
inhibit the exacerbation of COPD and bronchial asthma caused by infection with 
viruses, including HCoV-229E. However, the effects of these drugs on HCoV-229E 
replication and infection-induced inflammation in the human airway are unknown.
METHODS: Primary human nasal (HNE) and tracheal (HTE) epithelial cell cultures 
were infected with HCoV-229E.
RESULTS: Pretreatment of HNE and HTE cells with glycopyrronium or formoterol 
decreased viral RNA levels and/or titers, the expression of the HCoV-229E 
receptor CD13, the number and fluorescence intensity of acidic endosomes where 
HCoV-229E RNA enters the cytoplasm, and the infection-induced production of 
cytokines, including IL-6, IL-8, and IFN-β. Treatment of the cells with the CD13 
inhibitor 2'2'-dipyridyl decreased viral titers. Pretreatment of the cells with 
a combination of three drugs (glycopyrronium, formoterol, and budesonide) 
exerted additive inhibitory effects on viral titers and cytokine production. 
Pretreatment of HNE cells with glycopyrronium or formoterol reduced the 
susceptibility to infection, and pretreatment with the three drugs inhibited 
activation of nuclear factor-kappa B p50 and p65 proteins. Pretreatment with 
formoterol increased cAMP levels and treatment with cAMP decreased viral titers, 
CD13 expression, and the fluorescence intensity of acidic endosomes.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that glycopyrronium, formoterol, and a 
combination of glycopyrronium, formoterol, and budesonide inhibit HCoV-229E 
replication partly by inhibiting receptor expression and/or endosomal function 
and that these drugs modulate infection-induced inflammation in the airway.

Copyright © 2020 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2019.12.005
PMCID: PMC7102607
PMID: 32094077

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest This work was 
supported by a research support grant from AstraZeneca KK (NCR-17-12892). 
Glycopyrronium, formoterol, and budesonide were obtained from AstraZeneca PLC.


421. Int J Technol Assess Health Care. 2019 Jan;35(2):116-125. doi: 
10.1017/S0266462318003707. Epub 2019 Mar 4.

Is stratification testing for treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
exacerbations cost-effective in primary care? an early cost-utility analysis.

Abel L(1), Dakin HA(2), Roberts N(3), Ashdown HF(1), Butler CC(1), Hayward G(1), 
Van den Bruel A(1), Turner PJ(1), Yang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences,University of Oxford.
(2)Health Economics Research Centre,University of Oxford.
(3)Bodleian Health Care Libraries,University of Oxford.

OBJECTIVES: Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who 
experience acute exacerbations usually require treatment with oral steroids or 
antibiotics, depending on the etiology of the exacerbation. Current management 
is based on clinician's assessment and judgement, which lacks diagnostic 
accuracy and results in overtreatment. A test to guide these decisions in 
primary care is in development. We developed an early decision model to evaluate 
the cost-effectiveness of this treatment stratification test in the primary care 
setting in the United Kingdom.
METHODS: A combined decision tree and Markov model was developed of COPD 
progression and the exacerbation care pathway. Sensitivity analysis was carried 
out to guide technology development and inform evidence generation requirements.
RESULTS: The base case test strategy cost GBP 423 (USD 542) less and resulted in 
a health gain of 0.15 quality-adjusted life-years per patient compared with not 
testing. Testing reduced antibiotic prescriptions by 30 percent, potentially 
lowering the risk of antimicrobial resistance developing. In sensitivity 
analysis, the result depended on the clinical effects of treating patients 
according to the test result, as opposed to treating according to clinical 
judgement alone, for which there is limited evidence. The results were less 
sensitive to the accuracy of the test.
CONCLUSIONS: Testing may be cost-saving in primary care, but this requires 
robust evidence on whether test-guided treatment is effective. High quality 
evidence on the clinical utility of testing is required for early modeling of 
diagnostic tests generally.

DOI: 10.1017/S0266462318003707
PMID: 30829566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Clin Respir J. 2020 Mar 26. doi: 10.1111/crj.13190. Online ahead of print.

Adherence to COPD free triple inhaled therapy in the real world: a primary care 
based study.

Zucchelli A(1), Vetrano DL(1)(2), Bianchini E(3), Lombardo FP(4), Piraino A(5), 
Zibellini M(5), Ricci A(6), Marengoni A(1), Lapi F(3), Cricelli C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Geriatrics, Catholic University of Rome and IRCCS Fondazione 
Policlinico "A. Gemelli", Rome, Italy.
(3)Health Search, Italian College of General Practitioners and Primary Care, 
Florence, Italy.
(4)Italian College of General Practitioners and Primary Care, Florence, Italy.
(5)Chiesi Famaceutici S.p.A, Parma, Italy.
(6)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, S. Andrea Hospital-Sapienza 
University, Rome, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The development of new pharmacological treatments for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has improved health-related quality of life 
of patients. However, suboptimal adherence may limit its potential.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to assess the adherence to free 
triple inhaled therapy and to investigate poor adherence determinants among 
primary care patients.
METHODS: Data were derived from a primary care database in Italy. Patients aged 
40+ affected by COPD and prescribed with inhaled corticosteroids, long-acting 
beta agonists and long-acting muscarinic antagonists (N = 3177) were enrolled. 
Low adherence was defined as a proportion of days covered (PDC) by medications 
prescription lower than 80%. Predictors of low adherence were tested using 
logistic regression models.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The 85% of enrolled patients showed poor adherence to 
free triple inhaled therapy. Comorbidities, such as heart failure (OR 1.78, 
95%CI 1.19-2.75), depression (OR 1.41, 95%CI 1.06-1.88) and peripheral vascular 
disease (OR 1.32, 95%CI 1.01-1.74) were associated with poor adherence. Former 
(OR 0.52, 95%CI 0.34-0.78) or current smokers (OR 0.61, 95%CI 0.41-0.93) and 
patients with more severe airways obstruction or history of severe exacerbations 
(OR 0.64, 95%CI 0.52-0.79) were less likely to exhibit poor adherence. 
Real-world adherence to triple inhaled therapy with different inhalers is 
generally low. Higher GOLD airways obstruction stage and current or former 
smoking status are associated with increased adherence to treatment. Reduced 
perceived benefit on symptoms control is probably linked to poorer adherence to 
free triple therapy.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13190
PMID: 32216053


423. Ann Pharmacother. 2020 Jun 4:1060028020932134. doi: 10.1177/1060028020932134. 
Online ahead of print.

Dual- Versus Mono-Bronchodilator Therapy in Moderate to Severe COPD: A 
Meta-analysis.

Lipari M(1)(2), Kale-Pradhan PB(1)(2), Wilhelm SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Ascension St. John Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.

Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) guidelines recommend 
both long-acting and dual bronchodilator therapy. It is unclear if there are 
differences in efficacy and safety. Objective: This meta-analysis evaluates the 
efficacy of dual therapy with long-acting β-agonist (LABA) + long acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) compared with monotherapy with LAMA for COPD. 
Methods: We searched PubMed, CINAHL, and Web of Science databases from inception 
through March 2020 to identify English-language, prospective randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) that compared dual therapy with monotherapy in adult 
patients with COPD. Risk of bias was assessed using the Jadad score. Overall 
analysis was performed using Review Manager 5.3. Treatment effect was determined 
with the random-effects model using the Mantel-Haenszel method and was reported 
as mean difference (MD) with 95% CI. Results: A total of 18 RCTs were included 
(n = 6086; median Jadad score 5/5) that compared LAMA + LABA with LAMA. There 
was a greater improvement in forced expiratory volume at 1 s (FEV1) with dual 
therapy compared with LAMA: MD = 0.08; 95% CI = [0.05, 0.11]. There was no 
difference in St George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) scores between groups: 
OR = -0.85; 95% CI = [-1.83, 0.13]. There were no differences in overall adverse 
events (OR = 1.00; 95% CI = 0.92, 1.09), serious adverse events (OR = 1.01; 95% 
CI = 0.86, 1.18), or cardiovascular events (OR = 0.88; 95% CI = 0.58, 1.34). 
Conclusion and Relevance: Dual therapy improves FEV1 and is as safe as LAMA. 
Dual therapy does not improve SGRQ scores more than LAMA.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028020932134
PMID: 32493039


424. Eur Respir J. 2020 May 7;55(5):2001009. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01009-2020. Print 
2020 May.

Inhaled corticosteroids and COVID-19: a systematic review and clinical 
perspective.

Halpin DMG(1)(2), Singh D(2)(3), Hadfield RM(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Exeter Medical School, College of Medicine and Health, 
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK d.halpin@nhs.net.
(2)Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD).
(3)University of Manchester, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, 
Manchester, UK.
(4)Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.

There is no evidence on benefits or harms of inhaled steroids in COVID-19. It is 
essential that epidemiological studies of COVID-19 include detailed information 
on comorbidities and prior medication to help answer this question. 
https://bit.ly/2XVwIsa

The current coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by severe acute 
respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection, raises important 
questions as to whether pre-morbid use or continued administration of inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) affects the outcomes of acute respiratory infections due 
to coronavirus. Many physicians are concerned about whether individuals positive 
for SARS-CoV-2 and taking ICS should continue them or stop them, given that ICS 
are often regarded as immunosuppressive. A number of key questions arise. Are 
people with asthma or COPD at increased risk of developing COVID-19? Do ICS 
modify this risk, either increasing or decreasing it? Do ICS influence the 
clinical course of COVID-19? (figure 1). Whether ICS modify the risk of 
developing COVID-19 or the clinical course of COVID-19 in people who do not have 
lung disease should also be considered (figure 1).

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.01009-2020
PMCID: PMC7236828
PMID: 32341100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: D. Singh reports grants 
and personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Glenmark, 
Menarini, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Pulmatrix, Theravance and Verona, 
personal fees from Cipla, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Peptinnovate and Teva, 
outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: R.M. Hadfield has nothing to 
disclose. Conflict of interest: D.M.G. Halpin reports personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Pfizer and Sanofi, personal fees 
and non-financial support from Novartis and Boehringer Ingelheim, outside the 
submitted work.


425. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Feb 26;15:439-460. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S234942. eCollection 2020.

Economic Burden of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD): A Systematic 
Literature Review.

Iheanacho I(1), Zhang S(2), King D(3), Rizzo M(1), Ismaila AS(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Meta Research, Evidera, London, UK.
(2)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Collegeville, PA, USA.
(3)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Brentford, UK.
(4)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects 
over 250 million people globally, carrying a notable economic burden. This 
systematic literature review aimed to highlight the economic burden associated 
with moderate-to-very severe COPD and to investigate key drivers of healthcare 
resource utilization (HRU), direct costs and indirect costs for this patient 
population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Relevant publications published between January 1, 2006 
and November 14, 2016 were captured from the Embase, MEDLINE and MEDLINE 
In-Process databases. Supplemental searches from relevant 2015-2016 conferences 
were also performed. Titles and abstracts were reviewed by two independent 
researchers against pre-defined inclusion and exclusion criteria. Studies were 
grouped by the type of economic outcome presented (HRU or costs). Where 
possible, data were also grouped according to COPD severity and/or patient 
exacerbation history.
RESULTS: In total, 73 primary publications were included in this review: 66 
reported HRU, 22 reported direct costs and one reported indirect costs. Most of 
the studies (94%) reported on data from either Europe or North America. Trends 
were noted across multiple studies for higher direct costs (including mean costs 
per patient per year and mean costs per exacerbation) being associated with 
increasingly severe COPD and/or a history of more frequent or severe 
exacerbations. Similar trends were noted according to COPD severity and/or 
exacerbation history for rate of hospitalization and primary care visits. 
Multivariate analyses were reported by 29 studies and demonstrated the 
statistical significance of these associations. Several other drivers of 
increased costs and HRU were highlighted for patients with moderate-to-very 
severe COPD, including comorbidities, and treatment history.
CONCLUSION: Moderate-to-very severe COPD represents a considerable economic 
burden for healthcare providers despite the availability of efficacious 
treatments and comprehensive guidelines on their use. Further research is 
warranted to ensure cost-efficient COPD management, to improve treatments and 
ease budgetary pressures.

© 2020 Iheanacho et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S234942
PMCID: PMC7049777
PMID: 32161455

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following conflicts of 
interest during the last 3 years in relation to this article: SZ and ASI are 
employees of, and hold shares in, GlaxoSmithKline plc.; ASI is also a part-time 
unpaid professor at McMaster University, Canada. Evidera (II) was contracted by 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. to conduct the systematic literature review but was not 
paid for the development of this manuscript. MR is an employee of Xcenda UK and 
was previously employed by Evidera and contracted by GlaxoSmithKline plc. to 
conduct the systematic literature review but was not paid for the development of 
this publication. DK is a former GlaxoSmithKline plc. employee and is currently 
employed by Forest Systematic Reviews Ltd, contracted by GlaxoSmithKline plc. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


426. Respirology. 2019 Nov;24(11):1088-1094. doi: 10.1111/resp.13664. Epub 2019 Aug 
6.

Nasal high flow does not improve exercise tolerance in COPD patients recovering 
from acute exacerbation: A randomized crossover study.

Prieur G(1)(2)(3)(4), Medrinal C(2)(3)(4), Combret Y(1)(5), Dupuis Lozeron E(6), 
Bonnevie T(2)(7), Gravier FE(2)(7), Quieffin J(3)(4), Lamia B(2)(3)(4), Borel 
JC(8)(9), Reychler G(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique (IREC), Pôle de Pneumologie, 
ORL and Dermatologie, Groupe de Recherche en Kinésithérapie Respiratoire, 
Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB), Normandie 
University, UNIROUEN, Rouen, France.
(3)Pulmonology Department, Groupe Hospitalier du Havre, Montivilliers, France.
(4)Pulmonary Rehabilitation Department, Groupe Hospitalier du Havre, 
Montivilliers, France.
(5)Physiotherapy Department, Groupe Hospitalier du Havre, Montivilliers, France.
(6)Division of Clinical Epidemiology, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(7)ADIR Association, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(8)Association AGIR à dom, Research and Development, Meylan, France.
(9)HP2 INSERMU 1042, Grenoble, France.
(10)Service de Pneumologie, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, 
Belgium.

Comment in
    Respirology. 2019 Nov;24(11):1039-1041.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that by reducing respiratory work and 
improving gas exchange, nasal high flow (NHF) would improve exercise tolerance 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) following 
respiratory exacerbation.
METHODS: This was a monocentric, randomized, controlled crossover study. 
Patients with severe to very severe COPD carried out two high-intensity constant 
work-rate exercise tests (CWRET) with and without NHF on two consecutive days. 
The primary outcome was the mean difference in endurance time between both 
conditions. The secondary aims included vastus lateralis oxygenation (StO2 ), 
dyspnoea, leg discomfort, maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP), transcutaneous CO2 
pressure (PtcCO2 ), respiratory rate (RR), heart rate (HR) and pulsed O2 
saturation (SpO2 ), as well as the patients' opinions of the device.
RESULTS: A total of 19 patients were included (mean forced expiratory volume in 
1 s = 28.7 ± 10.8%, age = 62.1 ± 9.1 years). No significant differences in 
endurance time during the CWRET were found between the two test conditions 
(-66.58 (95% CI: -155.9 to 22.7) s, P = 0.12). StO2 , PtCO2 and HR were reduced 
at the end of the exercise with NHF (-2.1% (95% CI: -4.3 to -0.0); -1.3 mm Hg 
(95% CI: -2.5 to -0.2); -2.7 bpm (95% CI: -5.0 to -0.5), respectively, 
P ≤ 0.05). No significant differences were found for any of the other secondary 
outcomes. Half of the patients evaluated the device as being moderately to very 
uncomfortable.
CONCLUSION: NHF during exercise did not increase endurance time in patients with 
COPD following exacerbation.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT03058081 at clinicaltrials.gov.

© 2019 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13664
PMID: 31387158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


427. BMC Pulm Med. 2019 Jan 28;19(1):24. doi: 10.1186/s12890-019-0789-7.

Airway smooth muscle as an underutilised biomarker: a case report.

Sha J(1), Rorke S(2)(3), Langton D(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Frankston Hospital, 2 Hastings Road, 
Frankston, Victoria, Australia. joyjsha@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Frankston Hospital, 2 Hastings Road, 
Frankston, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Dorevitch Pathology, Heidelberg, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Severe asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) can 
be challenging to manage, particularly when the clinical features may be 
similar. With the increased availability of advanced therapies for both 
entities, it is more important than ever to diagnose and phenotype accurately to 
inform appropriate treatment decisions. This case highlights the use of 
endobronchial biopsies to allow for histological evaluation of airways disease, 
and in particular the role of airway smooth muscle mass as an additional 
biomarker that could facilitate the diagnostic process.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 65 year old woman presented with a diagnosis of severe COPD 
on the background of previous smoking and mild childhood asthma. Despite taking 
maximal inhaled pharmacotherapy, she had frequent exacerbations requiring 
corticosteroids and remained dyspnoeic on mild exertion. Lung function tests 
showed severe obstruction on spirometry (forced expiratory ratio 43%, forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s 47% predicted), and single breath Diffusing Capacity 
for Carbon Monoxide was moderately reduced at 45% predicted. Computed tomography 
revealed hyperinflation without marked emphysema. Quantitative CT for emphysema 
distribution demonstrated a relatively small lung fraction of 9.35% with <- 950 
Hounsfield units. Bronchoscopy with endobronchial biopsy was undertaken to 
further determine the underlying pathology, and airway mucosa histology was 
consistent with typical findings of asthma. The patient was treated with 
bronchial thermoplasty as she did not meet prescribing criteria for monoclonal 
antibodies. Six months post treatment, she had a significant improvement in 
symptom control and medication usage, without any exacerbations.
CONCLUSIONS: Airway smooth muscle histology is an underutilised biomarker that 
has a valuable role in phenotyping airways disease in the era of individualised 
medicine.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-019-0789-7
PMCID: PMC6348684
PMID: 30691439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Approval to treat patient with bronchial thermoplasty as part of research was 
granted by the Peninsula Health Human Research Ethics Committee. Reference 
number HREC/17/PH/16. Written consent was obtained from patient for 
participation. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written consent was obtained from 
patient for publication. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have 
no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


428. Pneumologie. 2020 Mar;74(3):149-158. doi: 10.1055/a-1083-7961. Epub 2020 Mar 6.

Duplicate Prescriptions of Inhaled Medications for Obstructive Lung Diseases.

[Article in English]

Kardos P(1), Geiss F(2), Simon J(2), Franken C(2), Butt U(3), Worth H(4).

Author information:
(1)Group Practice and Center for Allergy, Respiratory and Sleep Medicine at Red 
Cross Maingau Hospital Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Mail Order Pharmacy DocMorris N. V., Heerlen, Netherlands.
(3)German Airways League Bad Lippspringe, Germany.
(4)Facharztforum Fürth, Germany.

INTRODUCTION:  Inhalative treatments with metered dose aerosols and dry powder 
inhalers are the backbone of the pharmacotherapy for asthma and COPD. In the 
last decade many new and generic inhalative bronchodilators were launched at the 
German market, both monotherapies and fixed dose double bronchodilator 
(LABA/LAMA, beta adrenergic and antimuscarinic) or LABA and inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) and triple (LABA/LAMA/ICS) combinations. According to two 
surveys in 2015 among respiratory physicians we expected a high proportion of 
patients receiving duplicate prescriptions, e. g. a fixed dose new LABA/LAMA 
combination in addition to an existing ICS/LABA fixed dose combination.
METHODOLOGY:  We searched the database of a large mail order pharmacy 
(DocMorris) to identify duplicate prescriptions of inhalative drugs for a 
patient by the same or by two or more different physicians during a 3 months 
period.
RESULTS:  Unexpectedly, we found as little as around 1 % duplicate prescriptions 
for the same patient. Duplicate prescriptions involving combination products 
were found to be much more common than duplicate prescriptions of different 
mono-products. Irrespective the low percentage number of all prescriptions we 
saw in just one large mail order pharmacy several thousands of erroneous 
prescriptions.
CONCLUSION:  At least in the setting of this mail order pharmacy duplicate 
(i. e. contraindicated and potentially dangerous) prescriptions are relatively 
rare. Prescribers and pharmacists should be aware of the issue of duplicates - 
especially when prescribing or filling prescriptions with combination products.

Publisher: EINFüHRUNG:  Inhalative Behandlungen mit Dosieraerosolen und 
Trockenpulverinhalatoren sind das Rückgrat der Pharmakotherapie für Asthma und 
COPD. In den letzten 10 Jahren wurden viele neue und generische inhalative 
Bronchodilatatoren auf den deutschen Markt eingeführt, sowohl Monotherapien als 
auch Fixdosis-Kombinationen aus 2 Bronchodilatatoren (LABA/LAMA, 
beta-Adrenergikum und Anticholinergikum) oder LABA und inhalatives 
Kortikosteroid- (ICS) und Triple-Kombinationen (LABA/LAMA/ICS). Laut 2 Umfragen, 
die unter Lungenfachärzten im Jahr 2015 durchgeführt wurden, erwarteten wir 
einen hohen Anteil von Patienten, die doppelte Verschreibungen erhielten, z. B. 
eine neue LABA/LAMA-Kombination zusätzlich zu einer bestehenden 
ICS/LABA-Therapie.
METHODIK:  Wir haben die Datenbank einer großen Versandapotheke (DocMorris) 
durchsucht, um doppelte Verordnungen von Inhalationspräparaten für einen 
Patienten von demselben Arzt am gleichen Tag oder von 2 oder mehreren 
verschiedenen Ärzten innerhalb von 3 Monaten zu identifizieren.
ERGEBNISSE:  Unerwartet fanden wir nur etwa 1 % doppelte Verschreibungen für den 
gleichen Patienten. Dabei wurden Doppelverordnungen mit Kombinationsprodukten 
deutlich häufiger beobachtet als solche mit verschiedenen Monoprodukten. 
Immerhin handelt es sich um mehrere Tausend Rezepte, die wir in einer einzigen 
großen Apotheke gezählt haben.
FAZIT:  Zumindest in der Datenbasis dieser großen Versandapotheke sind 
Doppelverordnungen von Inhalativa (d. h. kontraindizierte und potenziell 
gefährliche Kombinationen) relativ selten. Zur Vermeidung von Medikationsfehlern 
sollten sich Verordner und Apotheker dieser Problematik bewusst sein, 
insbesondere bei der Verordnung bzw. Prüfung und Belieferung von 
Kombinationsprodukten.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1083-7961
PMID: 32143230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: According to this paper the authors PK and HW 
declare no conflict of interest.FG, JS and CF are employees of DocMorris, 
Heerlen.UB is Executive manager of the German Airways League.


429. Lung. 2020 Jun;198(3):507-514. doi: 10.1007/s00408-020-00357-y. Epub 2020 May 4.

COPD Assessment Test Changes from Baseline Correlate with COPD Exacerbations: A 
Longitudinal Analysis of the DACCORD Observational Study.

Kardos P(1), Vogelmeier CF(2), Worth H(3), Buhl R(4), Obermoser V(5), Criée 
CP(6).

Author information:
(1)Group Practice and Centre for Allergy, Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Red 
Cross Maingau Hospital, Praxis: Friedberger Anlage 31-32, 60316, Frankfurt, 
Germany. pkardos@aol.com.
(2)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University 
Medical Centre Giessen and Marburg, Philipps-University Marburg, Member of the 
German Centre for Lung Research (DZL), 35043, Marburg, Germany.
(3)Facharztforum Fürth, 90762, Fürth, Germany.
(4)Pulmonary Department, Mainz University Hospital, 55131, Mainz, Germany.
(5)Clinical Research, Respiratory, Novartis Pharma GmbH, 90429, Nürnberg, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Sleep and Respiratory Medicine, Evangelical Hospital 
Goettingen-Weende, 37120, Bovenden, Germany.

PURPOSE: A number of analyses have shown the immediate impact of COPD 
exacerbations on health status. However, none evaluated the long-term 
correlation between health status and the occurrence of exacerbations.
METHODS: DACCORD is an observational study in patients with COPD recruited 
across Germany following initiation or change in COPD maintenance medication. 
Data collected include COPD Assessment Test (CAT) total score on entry and after 
1 and 2 years, and the occurrence of exacerbations. We analysed the correlation 
between change from baseline in CAT total score and exacerbations, after 
excluding patients who exacerbated during the quarter immediately prior to the 
CAT assessment of interest.
RESULTS: The initial correlation analysis was performed in 6075 patients, 28% 
with ≥ 1 exacerbation over the 2-year follow-up, and 58% with a clinically 
relevant CAT improvement. There was a significant correlation between 
exacerbations over 2 years and CAT change from baseline at Year 2 (p = 0.0041). 
The Spearman's correlation coefficient was 0.03711, indicating very weak 
correlation-potentially driven by the high proportion of non-exacerbating 
patients. In a subsequent logistic regression, the probability of experiencing 
frequent (≥ 2 per year) or severe exacerbations was higher in patients with 
worsening in CAT total score (p < 0.001). However, the probability of a patient 
exacerbating in Year 1 or Year 2 did not correlate with CAT change.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population (initiating or changing maintenance COPD 
medication), patients with frequent or severe exacerbations had a long-term 
worsening in health status (beyond the acute effect of an exacerbation) compared 
with patients who do not exacerbate.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-020-00357-y
PMCID: PMC7242247
PMID: 32367415

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Kardos reports personal fees from Novartis, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, Menarini and Takeda, all of 
which are outside the submitted work. Dr Vogelmeier reports personal fees from 
Almirall, Cipla, Berlin Chemie/Menarini, CSL Behring and Teva, grants and 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Grifols, Mundipharma, Novartis and Takeda, and grants from the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) Competence Network Asthma and COPD 
(ASCONET), Bayer Schering Pharma AG, MSD and Pfizer, all of which are outside 
the submitted work. Dr Worth reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Klosterfrau, Menarini, Novartis, Omron and 
Takeda, all of which are outside the submitted work. Dr Buhl reports personal 
fees from AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Cipla, Sanofi, and Teva, and grants and personal 
fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and Roche, all of 
which are outside the submitted work. Dr Obermoser is employed by Novartis, the 
sponsor of the study. Dr Criée reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Klosterfrau, Menarini, Novartis, 
Omron, Sanofi and Takeda, all of which are outside the submitted work.


430. Open Access Maced J Med Sci. 2019 Jul 29;7(14):2298-2304. doi: 
10.3889/oamjms.2019.663. eCollection 2019 Jul 30.

Relationship between Vitamin D Level and Serum TNF-α Concentration on the 
Severity of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Ilyas M(1), Agussalim A(2), Megawati M(3), Massi N(3), Djaharuddin I(1), Bakri 
S(2), As'ad S(4), Arief M(4), Bahar B(5), Seweng A(5), Prihantono P(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology and Respiratory Medicine, Medicine Faculty, 
Hasanuddin University, Makassar, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Medicine Faculty, Hasanuddin University, 
Makassar, Indonesia.
(3)Medical Research Center, Hasanuddin University, Makassar, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Clinical Pathology, Medicine Faculty, Hasanuddin University, 
Makassar, Indonesia.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Public Health Faculty, Hasanuddin University, 
Makassar, Indonesia.
(6)Department of Surgery, Medicine Faculty, Hasanuddin University, Makassar, 
Indonesia.

BACKGROUND: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a chronic 
inflammatory disease and disturbed bacterial clearance. Vitamin D deficiency is 
sometimes observed in COPD patients and as significant roles in increasing 
inflammation of airway obstruction and systemic obstruction, increasing 
pro-inflammatory cytokine including TNF-α, reduction of bacterial clearance and 
increase exacerbation risk due to infection. Also, vitamin D plays significant 
roles in the metabolism of calcium and mineralisation of bones and regulation 
system of immune. TNF-α also has essential roles in pathogenesis and 
inflammation of COPD. Several studies that investigate the relationship between 
vitamin D level and serum TNF-α concentration in COPD patients are relatively 
uncommon, including in Indonesia.
AIM: This study aimed to assess the relationship between vitamin D level and 
TNF-α concentration in patients on the severity of the chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.
METHODS: This study was a hospital-based descriptive cross-sectional study. 
Total samples were 50 COPD patients with the average age of older than 60 years 
during their enrollments at the Department of Pulmonology and Respiratory 
Medicine of the Dr Wahidin Sudirohusodo General Hospital Makassar in September 
2018-January 2019. All procedures of the present study were reviewed and 
approved by the Research Ethics Committee of Medicine Faculty of Hasanuddin 
University. The severity of COPD was assessed according to the combination of 
COPD assessment stages that referred to the Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) Guideline 2015 that consisted of the combination 
of scoring COPD Assessment Test (CAT), the modified Medical Research Council 
(mMRC) questionnaire and results of the spirometry measurement. Assessment of 
airway obstruction levels referred to the GOLD spirometry criteria. 
Determination of thoracic photographs was conducted to verify the COPD diagnosis 
of the severity of COPD. Determination of serum TNF-α concentration and vitamin 
D3 [1,25(OH)2D3] level used the ELISA method.
RESULTS: The majority of COPD patients were observed in the category of older 
than 60 years old accounted for 34 COPD patients (68%), and the majority of COPD 
patients were males accounted for 47 males with COPD (94%). The majority of COPD 
patients were observed in the group of D (38%). All the study subjects observed 
in this study were smokers, and 82% of them were in the category of heavy 
smokers. 21 study subjects had higher concentration of serum TNF-α (tertile 3 = 
0.21-1.83 pg/dl), 20 study subjects and lower level of vitamin D (tertile 1 = 
182.1-364.5 pg/dl). The majority of the study subjects (38%) were in the 
category of severe COPD (category D of the severity of COPD at the tertile 3) 
according to the GOLD Combine Assessment. Given the relationship between vitamin 
D level and serum TNF-α concentration on the airway obstruction, there were 
significant positive correlations between the increase of vitamin D levels and 
the increase of serum TNF-α concentrations on airway obstruction. Given the 
relationship between vitamin D level and serum TNF-α concentration on the 
severity of COPD, there were significant positive correlations between the 
increase of vitamin D levels (tertiles 1, 2 and 3) and the increase of serum 
TNF-α concentrations on the severity of COPD at p-value < 0.05. Overall, there 
were non-linear relationships between vitamin D level and serum TNF-α 
concentration on the severity of COPD.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum TNF-α concentration was positively associated with airway 
obstruction level and severity of COPD. Low level of vitamin D was negatively 
associated with airway obstruction level and severity of COPD. Vitamin D3 level 
(1,25(OH)2D) was negatively associated with serum TNF-α concentration and airway 
obstruction level and severity of COPD.

Copyright: © 2019 Muhammad Ilyas, Agussalim Agussalim, Megawati Megawati, Nasrum 
Massi, Irawaty Djaharuddin, Syakib Bakri, Suryani As'ad, Mansyur Arief, 
Burhanuddin Bahar, Arifin Seweng, Prihantono Prihantono.

DOI: 10.3889/oamjms.2019.663
PMCID: PMC6765078
PMID: 31592277


431. Lung. 2020 Jun;198(3):515-523. doi: 10.1007/s00408-020-00348-z. Epub 2020 Mar 
24.

Correlations Between Serum Decoy Receptor 3 and Airflow Limitation and Quality 
of Life in Male Patients with Stable Stage and Acute Exacerbation of COPD.

Ghobadi H(1), Hosseini N(2), Aslani MR(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Department (Pulmonary Division), Faculty of Medicine, 
Ardabil University of Medical Sciences, Ardabil, Iran.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Ardabil University of Medical Sciences, Ardabil, Iran.
(3)Lung Inflammatory Diseases Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Ardabil 
University of Medical Sciences, Ardabil, Iran. mraslani105@yahoo.com.
(4)Neurogenetic Inflammation Research Centre, Mashhad University of Medical 
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. mraslani105@yahoo.com.

PURPOSE: Serum decoy receptor 3 (DcR3) level increases in chronic inflammatory 
diseases. The present study aimed to examine serum DcR3 and IL-6 levels in male 
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and acute 
exacerbation of the disease and correlations between these markers and airflow 
limitation.
METHODS: We measured serum DcR3 and IL-6 levels in 60 COPD patients [30 stable 
COPD (SCOPD), and 30 acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD)], and 30 control 
subjects and assessed their correlations with airflow limitation according to 
the COPD stage indicated by the global initiative for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (GOLD) criteria, peripheral O2 saturation (SpO2), and COPD 
assessment test (CAT) score. We also tested associations between serum DcR3 
levels and COPD patients' clinical parameters.
RESULTS: Both serum DcR3 and IL-6 levels increased with increasing severity of 
airflow limitation in SCOPD and AECOPD groups (P < 0.01 to 0.001). These markers 
also increased in patients with AECOPD compared with subjects in SCOPD group in 
GOLD stages III-IV (P < 0.05 to 0.001). In addition, there was a significant 
positive correlation between serum DcR3 level and IL-6, CAT score and smoking 
history (per year).
CONCLUSION: The study revealed that serum DcR3 level elevated with increasing 
severity of airflow limitation in male COPD patients, particularly in acute 
exacerbation phase. This increase was associated with a reduced quality of life 
and increased severity of hypoxia. These results suggest that DcR3 may be 
associated with the underlying pathophysiology of COPD in male patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-020-00348-z
PMID: 32211977


432. Data Brief. 2019 Aug 22;26:104277. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2019.104277. eCollection 
2019 Oct.

Data on the safety and tolerability of revefenacin, in patients with moderate to 
very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Donohue J(1), Kerwin E(2), Sethi S(3), Haumann B(4), Pendyala S(4), Dean L(4), 
Barnes CN(4), Moran EJ(4), Crater G(4).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Medicine, UNC School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, PC, Medford, OR, USA.
(3)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(4)Theravance Biopharma US, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.

This article contains information on the experimental design and methods on how 
the safety and tolerability data concerning patients with moderate to very 
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were obtained. This is in 
addition to our original research article. [1] We have also provided information 
on the clinical laboratory tests that were conducted. Further interpretation and 
discussion of the data are demonstrated in the article "Revefenacin, a 
Once-daily, Lung-selective, Long-acting Muscarinic Antagonist for Nebulized 
Therapy: Safety and Tolerability Results of a 52-week Phase 3 Trial in Moderate 
to Very Severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease." [1].

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2019.104277
PMCID: PMC6744553
PMID: 31534988


433. Int J Surg. 2020 Jun;78:28-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2020.04.010. Epub 2020 Apr 
15.

Moderate and severe exacerbations have a significant impact on health-related 
quality of life, utility, and lung function in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: A meta-analysis.

Guo J(1), Chen Y(2), Zhang W(3), Tong S(4), Dong J(5).

Author information:
(1)Rehabilitation and Treatment Centre, Wang Jing Hospital of CACMS, Beijing, 
100102, China.
(2)Rehabilitation Medicine Department, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100073, China.
(3)Rehabilitation Medicine Department, Beijing Luhe Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 101149, China.
(4)Rehabilitation Medicine Department, Beijing Haidian Hospital, Beijing, 
100080, China.
(5)Rehabilitation and Treatment Centre, Wang Jing Hospital of CACMS, Beijing, 
100102, China. Electronic address: biannn1026@163.com.

Comment in
    Int J Surg. 2020 Jun;78:166-167.

BACKGROUND: Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) may 
increase the risk of morbidity and mortality as well as pulmonary complications 
after surgery among patients with COPD. This meta-analysis was designed to 
explore the impact of moderate and severe exacerbations of COPD on 
health-related quality of life (HRQoL), utility, and lung function in patients 
with COPD.
METHODS: The individual impacts of moderate and severe exacerbations on St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), COPD Assessment Test (CAT), and 
EuroQoL-5 dimensions 5 level (EQ-5D-5L) scores, and on forced expiratory volume 
in 1 s (FEV1) were assessed. Adjustments were applied to account for differences 
in study design. Outcomes were measured at specific time points across a 
12-month study period, for all patients and for subsets with either no or ≥1 
severe exacerbations in the year before study entry. The proximity of each 
measurement in relation to a specific exacerbation was also assessed.
RESULTS: A total of seven randomized clinical trials (RCTs) ≥12-month 
interventional/observational studies with 18,746 COPD patients were assessed. 
Overall, 4,483 (24%) patients had ≥1 severe exacerbation in the previous year. 
Moderate and severe exacerbations were associated with worsening from baseline 
in SGRQ, CAT, EQ-5D-5L, and FEV1 measures; severe exacerbations had greater 
impact than moderate exacerbations.
CONCLUSIONS: Moderate and severe exacerbations have a substantial and lasting 
impact on HRQoL, utility, and lung function in patients with COPD, highlighting 
a need for effective exacerbation prevention.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2020.04.010
PMID: 32304896

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The author 
declared no interests.


434. Curr Med Res Opin. 2020 Jun;36(6):1049-1057. doi: 10.1080/03007995.2020.1763937. 
Epub 2020 May 14.

Clinical characteristics, treatment patterns, disease burden, and 
persistence/adherence in patients with asthma initiating inhaled triple therapy: 
real-world evidence from Japan.

Suzuki T(1), Fairburn-Beech J(2), Sato K(1), Kaise T(1).

Author information:
(1)Value Evidence Outcomes Department, Japan Development Division, 
GlaxoSmithKline K.K, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Value Evidence and Outcomes Department, GlaxoSmithKline, London, UK.

Objectives: To help optimize triple therapy use, treatment patterns and disease 
burden were investigated in patients in Japan with persistent asthma who 
initiated multi-inhaler triple therapy (inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting 
β2-agonist/long-acting muscarinic antagonist; ICS/LABA/LAMA).Methods: This 
retrospective, observational cohort study using health insurance claims data 
included adults with persistent asthma who initiated triple therapy in 2016. 
Patients who were prescribed ICS/LABA in 2016 were included as an 
ICS/LABA-matched cohort. Patients were stratified into those with asthma only 
and those with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) codes 
(asthma-COPD overlap [ACO]). Patient data from 1-year prior to 1 year post index 
date were analyzed.Results: For patients with asthma only in the triple therapy 
and ICS/LABA cohorts, baseline demographics were similar. A higher proportion of 
the triple-therapy cohort than the ICS/LABA cohort was receiving high-dose ICS 
at index (68.2% and 27.6%, respectively), and had experienced an exacerbation in 
the last year (64.0% and 29.4%, respectively). The proportion of patients with 
asthma only who developed any exacerbation was lower in the year following 
initiation of triple therapy compared with the year prior to initiation of 
triple therapy (45.8% vs 64.0%, respectively). For asthma only patients 
receiving triple therapy, the mean (standard deviation) proportion of days 
covered and medication possession ratio was 0.51 (0.36) and 0.86 (0.16), 
respectively. Similar trends were seen in patients with ACO in the 
triple-therapy and ICS/LABA cohorts.Conclusion: Evidence from this study may 
serve as a reference for the use of inhaled triple therapy for asthma.

DOI: 10.1080/03007995.2020.1763937
PMID: 32363945


435. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 Feb 15;201(4):414-422. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201907-1312OC.

Abnormal Activity of Neck Inspiratory Muscles during Sleep as a Prognostic 
Indicator in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Redolfi S(1)(2), Grassion L(3)(4), Rivals I(1)(5), Chavez M(6), Wattiez N(1), 
Arnulf I(2), Gonzalez-Bermejo J(1)(3), Similowski T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)UMRS1158 Neurophysiologie Respiratoire Expérimentale et Clinique, INSERM, 
Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(2)Service de Pathologies du Sommeil, Département R3S, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière Charles Foix, 
Paris, France.
(3)Service des Maladies Respiratoires, CHU de Haut-Lévêque, Pessac, France.
(4)Service de Pneumologie, Médecine Intensive et Réanimation, Département R3S, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière 
Charles Foix, Paris, France.
(5)Equipe de Statistique Appliquée-ESPCI Paris, PSL Research University, France; 
and.
(6)CNRS-UMR 7225, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 Feb 15;201(4):395-396.

Rationale: In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
increased activity of neck inspiratory muscles has been reported as a 
compensatory response to hyperinflation-related diaphragmatic dysfunction. The 
persistence of this activity during sleep could attenuate sleep-related 
hypoventilation and also negatively impact sleep and clinical 
outcomes.Objectives: To assess the persistence of neck-muscle activity during 
sleep in patients with COPD recovering from severe exacerbations (i.e., 
requiring hospitalization) and its impact on sleep quality and recurrence of 
exacerbations.Methods: Video polysomnography with neck-muscle EMG was performed 
in patients with COPD who were recovering from a severe exacerbation. The 
follow-up period lasted 6 months to record the next severe 
exacerbation.Measurements and Main Results: Twenty-nine patients were included 
in the study (median [25th-75th percentile] age, 71 [64-72] yr; 55% male; body 
mass index, 24 [21-29]; FEV1% predicted, 37 [29-45]; and BODE [body mass index, 
airflow obstruction, dyspnea, and exercise] index, 6 [5-7]). Twenty-six of these 
patients exhibited sleep-related neck-muscle activity, which was intermittent 
(limited to stage 3 sleep) in 17 and permanent throughout sleep in 9. α-Delta 
EEG activity during stage 3 sleep was observed in 87% of the patients. Compared 
with patients with no or intermittent neck-muscle activity, those with permanent 
neck-muscle activity showed more disrupted sleep, had experienced more 
exacerbations in the previous year, and suffered their next severe exacerbation 
earlier.Conclusions: Sleep-related neck-muscle activity occurs frequently in 
patients with COPD who are recovering from a severe exacerbation and seems to 
negatively affect sleep quality and prognosis; therefore, identification of this 
activity might improve COPD management after a severe exacerbation.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201907-1312OC
PMID: 31644879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Anasthesiol Intensivmed Notfallmed Schmerzther. 2020 Mar;55(3):165-177. doi: 
10.1055/a-0853-4013. Epub 2020 Mar 19.

[Update Extracorporeal Lung Support].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Reyher C, Muellenbach RM, Lepper PM, Mutlak H.

Extracorporeal lung support is increasingly implemented worldwide in clinical 
practice in patients with severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and 
is required when mechanical ventilation is unable to establish sufficient 
pulmonary gas exchange or if the respirator settings are persistent elevated 
with an increased risk for ventilator induced lung injury (VILI). Besides that, 
hypercapnic respiratory failure in patients with acute exacerbation of COPD 
(AECOPD) or acute respiratory syndrome (ARDS) is common and may require 
extracorporeal elimination of carbon dioxide by ECCO2R, which also has been 
increasingly used in the clinical setting. For both therapeutic regimes there is 
up to date no clear evidence for a significant reduction in mortality in 
patients with ARDS. Therefore extracorporeal lung support should be still 
considered as a rescue therapy. In this review, based on a selective literature 
research and clinical experience of the authors, management of patients with 
extracorporeal lung assist, focusing on ECMO and ECCO2R is summarized.

Publisher: Das akute Lungenversagen des Erwachsenen (ARDS) ist nach wie vor mit 
einer hohen Mortalität von ca. 40% belastet – eine große Herausforderung für die 
Intensivmedizin. Dieser Beitrag erläutert, bei welchen Befundkonstellationen die 
Lungenersatzverfahren ECMO (extrakorporale Membranoxygenierung) und ECCO2R 
(extrakorporale CO2-Elimination) als Rescue-Therapie zum Einsatz kommen können 
und worauf dabei zu achten ist.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0853-4013
PMID: 32191970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Erklärung zu finanziellen Interessen 
Forschungsförderung erhalten: nein; Honorar/geldwerten Vorteil für 
Referententätigkeit erhalten: ja, von einer anderen Institution (Pharma- oder 
Medizintechnikfirma usw.); Bezahlter Berater/interner 
Schulungsreferent/Gehaltsempfänger: nein; Patent/Geschäftsanteile/Aktien 
(Autor/Partner, Ehepartner, Kinder) an im Bereich der Medizin aktiven Firma: 
nein; Patent/Geschäftsanteile/Aktien (Autor/Partner, Ehepartner, Kinder) an zu 
Sponsoren dieser Fortbildung bzw. durch die Fortbildung in ihren 
Geschäftsinteressen berührten Firma: nein. Erklärung zu nichtfinanziellen 
Interessen Die Autorinnen/Autoren geben an, dass kein Interessenkonflikt 
besteht.


437. Lancet Respir Med. 2020 Feb;8(2):158-170. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(19)30338-8. 
Epub 2019 Sep 28.

Predicting response to benralizumab in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 
analyses of GALATHEA and TERRANOVA studies.

Criner GJ(1), Celli BR(2), Singh D(3), Agusti A(4), Papi A(5), Jison M(6), 
Makulova N(6), Shih VH(6), Brooks L(6), Barker P(6), Martin UJ(6), Newbold P(6).

Author information:
(1)Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
Electronic address: gerard.criner@tuhs.temple.edu.
(2)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)University of Manchester, Manchester University NHS Hospital Trust, 
Manchester, UK.
(4)Respiratory Institute, Hospital Clinic, University of Barcelona, Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Respiratorias, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(6)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Benralizumab did not significantly reduce exacerbations compared 
with placebo in the phase 3 GALATHEA and TERRANOVA trials of benralizumab for 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We aimed to identify 
clinical and physiological characteristics of patients with COPD that could help 
to identify people who are likely to have the greatest treatment effect with 
benralizumab.
METHODS: We analysed individual study and pooled results from GALATHEA and 
TERRANOVA. At study enrolment, patients from GALATHEA and TERRANOVA were aged 
40-85 years, had moderate to very severe airflow limitation, had elevated blood 
eosinophil counts, and at least two exacerbations or one severe exacerbation in 
the previous year despite dual inhaled therapy (inhaled corticosteroids plus 
long-acting β2-agonists or long-acting β2-agonists plus long-acting muscarinic 
antagonists) or triple inhaled therapy (inhaled corticosteroids plus long-acting 
β2-agonists plus long-acting muscarinic antagonists). We analysed data for 3910 
patients who received benralizumab (30 mg or 100 mg subcutaneously every 8 
weeks; first three doses every 4 weeks) or placebo with dual or triple therapy 
to identify factors consistently associated with annual exacerbation rate 
reduction. We evaluated the annual exacerbation rate for benralizumab versus 
placebo as the primary endpoint. GALATHEA and TERRANOVA are registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02138916 and NCT02155660, respectively.
FINDINGS: For 2665 patients with elevated blood eosinophil counts, treatment 
effect with benralizumab every 8 weeks at 100 mg, but not at 30 mg, occurred for 
patients with a history of more frequent exacerbations, poorer baseline lung 
function, or greater baseline lung function improvement with short-acting 
bronchodilators. Patients with baseline blood eosinophil counts of 220 cells per 
μL or greater with: three or more exacerbations in the previous year receiving 
benralizumab every 8 weeks versus placebo, had rate ratios (RRs) of 0·69 (95% CI 
0·56-0·83) for 100 mg and 0·86 (0·71-1·04) for 30 mg; postbronchodilator FEV1 of 
less than 40% had RRs of 0·76 (0·64-0·91) for 100 mg and 0·90 (0·76-1·06) for 30 
mg; and postbronchodilator response of at least 15% had RRs of 0·67 (0·54-0·83) 
for 100 mg and 0·87 (0·71-1·07) for 30 mg. When combined factors were examined, 
patients with elevated baseline blood eosinophil counts, with three or more 
exacerbations in the previous year, and who were receiving triple therapy were 
identified as likely to benefit from benralizumab 100 mg every 8 weeks versus 
placebo (RR 0·70 [95% CI 0·56-0·88]). Benralizumab 30 mg every 8 weeks did not 
benefit patients meeting these criteria compared with placebo (RR 0·99 [95% CI 
0·79-1·23]).
INTERPRETATION: Elevated blood eosinophil counts combined with clinical 
characteristics identified a subpopulation of patients with COPD who had 
reductions in exacerbations with benralizumab treatment. These 
hypothesis-generating analyses identified the potential efficacy of benralizumab 
100 mg for this subpopulation. These findings require prospective evaluation in 
clinical trials.
FUNDING: AstraZeneca.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(19)30338-8
PMID: 31575508


438. BMC Pulm Med. 2019 Jun 24;19(1):112. doi: 10.1186/s12890-019-0867-x.

Relationship between the respiratory microbiome and the severity of airflow 
limitation, history of exacerbations and circulating eosinophils in COPD 
patients.

Millares L(1)(2)(3), Pascual S(4), Montón C(3)(5)(6)(7), García-Núñez 
M(1)(2)(3), Lalmolda C(1)(2), Faner R(2)(7), Casadevall C(2)(4)(8), Setó 
L(1)(2), Capilla S(9), Moreno A(5), Castro-Acosta AA(2)(10), Alvarez-Martinez 
CJ(2)(10), Sibila O(7)(11), Peces-Barba G(2)(12), Cosio BG(2)(13), Agustí 
A(2)(7)(14), Gea J(2)(4)(7)(8), Monsó E(15)(16)(17)(18).

Author information:
(1)Fundació Parc Taulí- Institut d' Investigació i Innovació Parc Taulí (I3PT), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias 
(CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Esfera UAB, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Respiratory Medicine Department, Hospital del Mar - IMIM, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Universitari Parc Taulí, Parc 
Taulí 1, 08208, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Health Services Research on Chronic Diseases Network- REDISSEC, Galdakao, 
Spain.
(7)Barcelona Respiratory Network, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)DCEXS, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Department of Microbiology, Hospital Universitari Parc Taulí, Sabadell, 
Spain.
(10)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, 
Madrid, Spain.
(11)Respiratory Department, Biomedical Research Institute Sant Pau (IIB-Sant 
Pau), Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
(13)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Universitari Son 
Espases-IdISBa, Mallorca, Spain.
(14)Institut Respiratori, Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, Universidad de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(15)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias 
(CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain. 
emonso@tauli.cat.
(16)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Universitari Parc Taulí, Parc 
Taulí 1, 08208, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain. emonso@tauli.cat.
(17)Barcelona Respiratory Network, Barcelona, Spain. emonso@tauli.cat.
(18)Department of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, 
Spain. emonso@tauli.cat.

BACKGROUND: The respiratory microbiome is altered in COPD patients but its 
relationship with core components of the disease, such as the severity of 
airflow limitation, the frequency of exacerbations or the circulating levels of 
eosinophils, is unclear.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study comprising 72 clinically stable COPD patients 
(mean age 68 [SD 7.9] years; FEV1 48.7 [SD 20.1]% of reference) who provided 
spontaneous sputum samples for 16S rRNA gene amplification and sequencing. The 
microbiome composition was analysed with QIIME.
RESULTS: We observed that: (1) more severe airflow limitation was associated 
with reduced relative abundance (RA) of Treponema and an increase in 
Pseudomonas; (2) patients with ≥2 exacerbations the previous year showed a 
significantly different bacterial community with respect to non-exacerbators 
(p = 0.014), with changes in 13 genera, including an increase of Pseudomonas, 
and finally, (3) peripheral eosinophils levels ≥2% were associated with more 
diverse microbiome [Chao1 224.51 (74.88) vs 277.39 (78.92) p = 0.006; Shannon 
3.94 (1.05) vs 4.54 (1.06) p = 0.020], and a significant increase in the RAs of 
20 genera.
CONCLUSION: The respiratory microbiome in clinically stable COPD patients varies 
significantly according to the severity of airflow limitation, previous history 
of exacerbations and circulating eosinophils levels.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-019-0867-x
PMCID: PMC6591812
PMID: 31234826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


439. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Nov 29;14:2725-2731. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S196615. eCollection 2019.

Clinical Outcomes Of Using Nebulized Budesonide As The Initial Treatment For 
Acute Exacerbations Of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Post-Hoc 
Analysis.

Zheng JP(#)(1), Zhang J(#)(2), Ma LJ(3), Chen P(4), Huang M(5), Ou XM(6), Zhao 
ZW(7), Jiang SJ(8), Cao J(9), Yao W(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research 
Center, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, 
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Henan Provincial People's Hospital, 
Henan, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Hunan, People's 
Republic of China.
(5)Jiangsu Province Hospital, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Chengdu, People's 
Republic of China.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, 
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shandong Provincial Hospital, Shandong, 
People's Republic of China.
(9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tianjin Medical University General 
Hospital, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: The current guidelines recommend the use of systemic corticosteroids 
(SCS) as the optimal treatment for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (AECOPD). The aim of this real-world study was to evaluate 
whether nebulized budesonide (NBS) could also be used as an initial treatment 
for AECOPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: AECOPD patients initially treated with NBS or SCS 
(oral/intravenous) were enrolled. A large-scale, long-term multicenter cohort 
study of AECOPD patients was performed to analyze outcomes for each treatment 
(NCT02051166).
RESULTS: Initial NBS and SCS treatment resulted in similar outcomes in terms of 
improvements in FEV1, PaO2, SaO2, and PaCO2. Disease severity affected outcome 
similarly in both groups. When the groups were stratified according to whether 
the initial treatment was subsequently intensified or reduced, more intubation 
was seen in the groups in which initial treatment was intensified. NBS 
escalation and SCS reduction groups spent more days in the hospital. The NBS 
escalation group was associated with the highest medical expenditure and a 
relatively higher rate of new-onset pneumonia. The NBS maintenance/reduction 
group showed the lowest mortality rate between groups. Stratification according 
to initial PaCO2 level showed more intubation in the groups with high initial 
PaCO2 concentrations.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that NBS may be used as an initial treatment 
in certain AECOPD patients, and further studies are needed to better define 
those most likely to benefit.

© 2019 Zheng et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S196615
PMCID: PMC6889964
PMID: 31819404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


440. Postgrad Med J. 2020 Jan;96(1131):28-32. doi: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2019-136599. 
Epub 2019 Aug 2.

Severity of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with 'exacerbator with 
emphysema phenotype' is associated with potential biomarkers.

Hao W(1)(2), Li M(2), Zhang Y(3), Zhang C(3), Wang P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Yan'an University 
Affiliated Hospital, Yan'an, China hwdokgood@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Yan'an University 
Affiliated Hospital, Yan'an, China.

OBJECTIVE: The present study was designed to investigate the biomarkers levels 
of fractalkine (FKN), neutrophil elastase (NE) and matrix metalloproteinase-12 
(MMP-12) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with 'exacerbator with 
emphysema phenotype' and to evaluate the associations between the biomarkers 
levels and the severity of disease by spirometric measurements.
METHODS: A total of 84 COPD patients and 49 healthy controls were enrolled in 
our study. ELISA were utilised to detect the FKN, MMP-12 and NE in serum from 
all subjects.
RESULTS: FKN (p<0.001), NE (p=0.039) and MMP-12 (p<0.001) in serum of COPD 
patients showed higher levels than that of healthy control subjects. Serum FKN 
(p<0.001), MMP-12 (p<0.001) and NE (p=0.043) levels were significantly higher in 
severe and very severe COPD patients than that in mild and moderate COPD 
patients. Circulating FKN, MMP-12 and NE expression levels were significantly 
elevated (p<0.001) in COPD smokers compared with COPD non-smokers. The smoke 
pack years were negatively correlated with FEV1%pred (r=-0.5036), FEV1/FVC ratio 
(r=-0.2847) (FEV, forced expiratory volume; FVC, forced vital capacity). 
Similarly, we observed a strong positive correlation between the smoke pack 
years and serum levels of FKN (r=0.4971), MMP-12 (r=0.4315) and NE (r=0.2754). 
FEV1%pred was strongly negatively correlated with cytokine levels of FKN 
(r=-0.4367), MMP-12 (r=-0.3295) and NE (r=-0.2684). Likewise, FEV1/FVC ratio was 
negatively correlated with mediators of inflammation levels of FKN (r=-0.3867), 
MMP-12 (r=-0.2941) and NE (r=-0.2153).
CONCLUSION: Serum FKN, MMP-12 and NE concentrations in COPD patients are 
directly associated with the severity of COPD with 'exacerbator with emphysema 
phenotype'. This finding suggests that FKN, MMP-12 and NE might play an 
important role in the pathophysiology of COPD.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2019-136599
PMID: 31375557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


441. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Oct 15;200(8):1013-1021. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201902-0252OC.

Effect of Including Important Clinical Variables on Accuracy of the Lung 
Allocation Score for Cystic Fibrosis and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Lehr CJ(1), Skeans M(2), Dasenbrook E(1)(3), Fink A(3), Fernandez G(3), Faro 
A(3), Valapour M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients, Hennepin Healthcare Research 
Institute, Minneapolis, Minnesota; and.
(3)Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, Maryland.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Oct 15;200(8):956-957.

Rationale: Clinical variables associated with shortened survival in patients 
with advanced-stage cystic fibrosis (CF) are not included in the lung allocation 
score (LAS).Objectives: To identify variables associated with wait-list and 
post-transplant mortality for CF lung transplant candidates using a novel 
database and to analyze the impact of including new CF-specific variables in the 
LAS system.Methods: A deterministic matching algorithm identified patients from 
the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients and the Cystic Fibrosis 
Foundation Patient Registry. LAS wait-list and post-transplant survival models 
were recalculated using CF-specific variables. This multicenter, retrospective, 
population-based study of all lung transplant wait-list candidates aged 12 years 
or older from January 1, 2011, to December 31, 2014, included 9,043 patients on 
the lung transplant waiting list and 6,110 lung transplant recipients between 
2011 and 2014, comprising 1,020 and 677 with CF, respectively.Measurements and 
Main Results: Measured outcomes were changes in LAS and lung allocation rank. 
For CF candidates, any Burkholderia sp. (hazard ratio [HR], 2.8; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 1.2-6.6), 29-42 days hospitalized (HR 2.8; CI 1.3-5.9), massive 
hemoptysis (HR 2.1; CI 1.1-3.9), and relative drop in FEV1 ≥30% over 12 months 
(HR 1.7; CI 1.0-2.8) increased wait-list mortality risk; pulmonary exacerbation 
time 15-28 days (1.8; 1.1-2.9) increased post-transplant mortality risk. A 
relative drop in FEV1 ≥10% in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
candidates was associated with increased wait-list mortality risk (HR 2.6; CI 
1.2-5.4). Variability in LAS score and rank increased in patients with CF. 
Priority for transplant increased for COPD candidates. Access did not change for 
other diagnosis groups.Conclusions: Adding CF-specific variables improved 
discrimination among wait-listed CF candidates and benefited COPD candidates.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201902-0252OC
PMID: 31199166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Ter Arkh. 2019 Nov 15;91(11):49-54. doi: 10.26442/00403660.2019.11.000424.

[Analysis of the impact of vaccination of pneumococcal infection in patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in combination with diabetes].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Ignatova GL(1), Blinova EV(1), Antonov VN(1), Grebneva IV(1).

Author information:
(1)South Ural State Medical University Department of Therapy Institute of 
Additional Professional Education.

AIM: The article presents data on the evaluation of the clinical efficacy of 
using a conjugated pneumococcal vaccine in patients with COPD in combination 
with 2-type diabetes during a 3-year follow - up period.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study included 309 patients with an isolated course 
of COPD and in combination with diabetes. The main parameters for evaluating the 
effectiveness were: the dynamics of clinical symptoms - shortness of breath on 
the mMRC scale, CAT test, FEV1, the number of exacerbations, hospitalizations, 
the number of pneumonia, the state of carbohydrate metabolism (HbA1c) and the 
lipid profile. For vaccine prevention 13-valent conjugated pneumococcal vaccine 
Prevenar-13 was used.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The use of PСV13 helps to reduce the severity of 
respiratory symptoms, reduce the number and duration of exacerbations of COPD, 
reduce the number of pneumonia. Both in isolated course of COPD and in 
combination with diabetes. Vaccination PCV13 in patients with comorbid course 
contributes to the compensation of carbohydrate metabolism and improve the lipid 
profile.

Publisher: Цель. В статье приводятся данные об оценке клинической эффективности 
применения конъюгированной пневмококковой вакцины у пациентов с хронической 
обструктивной болезнью легких (ХОБЛ) в сочетании с сахарным диабетом (СД) типа 2 
в течение 3-летнего периода наблюдения. Материалы и методы. В исследование 
включено 309 пациентов с изолированным течением ХОБЛ и в комбинации с СД. 
Основными параметрами для оценки эффективности являлась динамика клинических 
симптомов: одышка по шкале mMRC, оценочный тест ХОБЛ по САТ-тесту, объем 
форсированного выдоха за 1-ю секунду, количество обострений, госпитализаций, 
число пневмоний, состояние углеводного обмена (HbA1c) и липидного профиля. Для 
вакцинопрофилактики использовалась 13-валентная конъюгированная пневмококковая 
вакцина Превенар-13 (ПКВ-13). Результаты и заключение. Применение ПКВ-13 
способствует уменьшению тяжести респираторных симптомов, сокращению числа и 
длительности обострений ХОБЛ, снижению количества пневмоний как при 
изолированном течении ХОБЛ, так и при сочетании с СД. Вакцинация Превенар-13 у 
пациентов с коморбидным течением способствует компенсации углеводного обмена и 
улучшению липидного профиля.

DOI: 10.26442/00403660.2019.11.000424
PMID: 32598610


443. PLoS One. 2020 Feb 24;15(2):e0229484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229484. 
eCollection 2020.

Associations among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with asthma, pneumonia, 
and corticosteroid use in the general population.

Yeh JJ(1)(2)(3), Lin CL(4)(5), Kao CH(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Ditmanson Medical Foundation, Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan.
(2)Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Management Office for Health Data, China Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Center of Augmented Intelligence in Healthcare, China Medical University 
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, China Medical 
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET Center, China Medical University 
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Bioinformatics and Medical Engineering, Asia University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the association among chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) with asthma, steroid use, and pneumonia in the general population.
METHODS: Using Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database to identify 
patients with incident pneumonia, we established a COPD with asthma cohort of 
12,538 patients and a COPD cohort of 25,069 patients. In both cohorts, the risk 
of incident pneumonia was assessed using multivariable Cox proportional hazards 
models.
RESULTS: The adjusted hazard ratio (aHR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) for 
incident pneumonia was 2.38 (2.14, 2.66) in the COPD with asthma cohort, 
regardless of age, sex, comorbidities, and drug use. COPD cohort without inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICSs) use served as a reference. The aHR (95% CI) for COPD 
cohort with ICSs use was 1.34 (0.98, 1.83); that for COPD with asthma cohort 
without ICSs use was 2.46 (2.20, 2.76); and that for COPD with asthma cohort 
with ICSs use was 2.32 (1.99, 2.72). COPD cohort without oral steroids (OSs) use 
served as a reference; the aHR (95% CI) for COPD with asthma cohort without OSs 
use and with OSs use was 3.25 (2.72, 3.89) and 2.38 (2.07, 2.74), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The COPD with asthma cohort had a higher risk of incident 
pneumonia, regardless of age, sex, comorbidities, and ICSs or OSs use. COPD 
cohort with ICSs use did not have a notable risk of incident pneumonia. The COPD 
with asthma cohort had a higher risk of incident pneumonia, even without 
ICSs/OSs use.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229484
PMCID: PMC7039502
PMID: 32092112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


444. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Jan 9;15:99-106. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S229794. eCollection 2020.

Glycopyrrolate/Formoterol Fumarate Metered Dose Inhaler Improves Lung Function 
versus Monotherapies in GOLD Category A Patients with COPD: Pooled Data from the 
Phase III PINNACLE Studies.

Martinez FJ(1), Rabe KF(2), Lipworth BJ(3), Arora S(4), Jenkins M(5), Martin 
UJ(6), Reisner C(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Joan and Sanford I. Weill Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pneumonology, LungenClinic Grosshansdorf and 
Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Airway Research Center North, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Grosshansdorf, Germany.
(3)Division of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, Scottish Centre for Respiratory 
Research, Ninewells Hospital, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK.
(4)Aventiv Research Inc., Columbus, OH, USA.
(5)Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Research and Development, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(7)R&D Biopharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
recommends a short-acting bronchodilator or single long-acting bronchodilator as 
an initial pharmacological treatment for GOLD category A patients with COPD. We 
pooled data from the PINNACLE-1, -2, and -4 studies to evaluate the efficacy and 
safety of the dual bronchodilator fixed-dose combination 
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI), formulated 
using co-suspension delivery technology, in GOLD category A patients with 
moderate-to-very severe COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: PINNACLE-1, -2, and -4 were Phase III, randomized, 
double-blind, parallel-group, multicenter studies (NCT01854645, NCT01854658, and 
NCT02343458). Patients received 24 weeks' treatment with GFF MDI 18/9.6 µg, 
glycopyrrolate (GP) MDI 18 µg, formoterol fumarate (FF) MDI 9.6 µg, or placebo 
MDI twice daily. GOLD category A patients were identified based on a COPD 
Assessment Test score of <10 and exacerbation history in the previous year 
(none/one not requiring hospitalization). Endpoints evaluated were change from 
baseline in morning pre-dose trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), 
peak change from baseline in FEV1 within 2 hrs post-dose, and adverse events 
(AEs).
RESULTS: The pooled intent-to-treat population comprised 729 GOLD category A 
patients. GFF MDI significantly improved morning pre-dose trough FEV1 at Week 24 
versus GP MDI, FF MDI, and placebo MDI (least squares mean [LSM] differences 54 
mL, 62 mL, and 188 mL, respectively; all p≤0.0053), and peak FEV1 at Week 24 
versus GP MDI, FF MDI, and placebo MDI (LSM differences 124 mL, 104 mL, and 307 
mL, respectively; all p<0.0001). Improvements over 24 weeks were comparable to 
at Week 24. The AE profile of GFF MDI in GOLD category A patients was similar to 
monocomponents and placebo MDI.
CONCLUSION: GFF MDI significantly improved lung function versus monocomponents 
and placebo MDI in GOLD category A patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD, 
with no unexpected safety findings.

© 2020 Martinez et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S229794
PMCID: PMC6957003
PMID: 32021148

Conflict of interest statement: FJM reports personal fees and non-financial 
support from American College of Chest Physicians, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, Concert, Continuing Education, Gala, Genentech, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Inova Fairfax Health System, Miller Communications, National 
Association for Continuing Education, Novartis, Pearl – a member of the 
AstraZeneca Group, PeerView Communications, Prime Communications, Puerto Rican 
Respiratory Society, Roche, Sunovion, and Theravance; non-financial support from 
ProterixBio; personal fees from American Thoracic Society, Columbia University, 
Haymarket Communications, Integritas, inThought Research, MD Magazine, Methodist 
Hospital Brooklyn, New York University, Teva, Unity, UpToDate, WebMD/MedScape, 
and Western Connecticut Health Network; and grants from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline and National Institutes of Health. KFR reports 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi 
Pharmaceuticals, InterMune, Novartis, Sanofi, and Teva; and grants from the 
Ministry of Education and Science, Germany. BJL is one of a number of 
co-investigators on an AstraZeneca-sponsored grant received by the University of 
Dundee to support genomic studies in COPD. He has also received speaker fees 
from AstraZeneca; payment for consulting and speaking from Boehringer Ingelheim 
and Chiesi; grant support from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, and Janssen; 
advisory board and speaker fees from Teva; and consulting fees from Sandoz, 
Cipla, Dr Reddys, and Lupin. MJ, UJM, and CR are employees of AstraZeneca and 
hold stock and/or stock options in the company. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.


445. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Dec;106(6):1222-1235. doi: 10.1002/cpt.1540. Epub 2019 
Jul 23.

Review of Drug Development Guidance to Treat Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease: US and EU Perspectives.

van Haarst A(1), McGarvey L(2), Paglialunga S(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Affairs, Celerion, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA.
(2)Centre for Experimental Medicine, School of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University, Belfast, UK.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains a leading cause of death 
worldwide, yet only one new drug class has been approved in the last decade. 
However, resurgence in COPD treatment has been recently fueled by a greater 
understanding of the pathophysiology and natural history of the disease, as well 
as a growing prevalence and an aging population. Currently, there are nearly 25 
novel drug targets in development. Furthermore, the indication has undergone 
some fundamental changes over the last couple of years, including an updated 
diagnosis paradigm, validation, and approval of patient-reported outcome 
questionnaires for clinical trials, and drug development tools, such as a 
prognostic biomarker for patient selection. In the context of clinical trials, 
this review aims to summarize recent changes to the diagnosis and evaluation of 
COPD and to provide an overview of US and European regulatory guidance.

© 2019 The Authors Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.1540
PMCID: PMC6896238
PMID: 31334840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.v.H. and S.P. are employees of Celerion. 
L.M.G. has received consultancy and lecture fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Bionorica, Afferent, Celerion, Bellus Health, 
and Bayer.


446. Adv Ther. 2020 Apr;37(4):1591-1607. doi: 10.1007/s12325-020-01266-5. Epub 2020 
Mar 6.

Efficacy and Safety of Budesonide/Glycopyrrolate/Formoterol Fumarate Metered 
Dose Inhaler in Chinese Patients with COPD: A Subgroup Analysis of KRONOS.

Wang C(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Yang T(6)(7)(8)(9), Kang J(10), Chen R(11), Zhao L(12), 
He H(13), Assam PN(14), Su R(14), Bourne E(15), Ballal S(16), DeAngelis K(17), 
Dorinsky P(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center of Respiratory 
Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, No. 2, East Yinghua Street, Chaoyang 
District, Beijing, 100029, China. cyh-birm@263.net.
(2)Institute of Respiratory Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China. cyh-birm@263.net.
(3)National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Diseases, Beijing, China. 
cyh-birm@263.net.
(4)Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China. cyh-birm@263.net.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China. cyh-birm@263.net.
(6)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center of Respiratory 
Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, No. 2, East Yinghua Street, Chaoyang 
District, Beijing, 100029, China.
(7)Institute of Respiratory Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(8)National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Diseases, Beijing, China.
(9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China.
(10)The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(11)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(12)Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(13)The First Affiliated Hospital of Baotou Medical College, Inner Mongolia 
University of Science and Technology, Baotou, Inner Mongolia, China.
(14)AstraZeneca, Shanghai, China.
(15)AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.
(16)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(17)Formerly of AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: This pre-specified subgroup analysis evaluated the efficacy and 
safety of budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler 
(BGF MDI) triple therapy versus corresponding dual therapies in the China 
subgroup of the phase III, double-blind KRONOS study in patients with moderate 
to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Patients were randomized 2:2:1:1 to BGF MDI 320/18/9.6 μg, 
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate (GFF) MDI 18/9.6 μg, budesonide/formoterol 
fumarate (BFF) MDI 320/9.6 μg, or budesonide/formoterol fumarate dry powder 
inhaler (BUD/FORM DPI) 400/12 μg twice daily for 24 weeks. The primary endpoint 
was change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (FEV1) over weeks 12-24. Secondary endpoints included symptoms, 
health-related quality of life, and safety. Rate of moderate/severe COPD 
exacerbations was an additional efficacy endpoint.
RESULTS: In the China subgroup (n = 432; 22.7% of the KRONOS population), BGF 
MDI demonstrated nominally significant improvements in the primary endpoint 
versus BFF MDI (least squares mean (LSM) difference 68 mL; P = 0.0035) and 
BUD/FORM DPI (LSM difference 78 mL; P = 0.0010) but not GFF MDI (LSM difference 
- 4 mL; P = 0.8316). BGF MDI demonstrated at least numerical improvements versus 
comparators in secondary lung function and symptom endpoints. BGF MDI reduced 
the rate of moderate/severe COPD exacerbations versus GFF MDI (rate ratio 0.41; 
P = 0.0030), with numerical benefits versus BFF MDI and BUD/FORM DPI. All 
treatments were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Results demonstrated that BGF MDI showed benefits on lung function 
(vs inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist), as well as symptoms and 
exacerbations relative to dual therapies. Findings support BGF MDI use in 
Chinese patients with moderate to very severe COPD.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02497001.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-020-01266-5
PMCID: PMC7140742
PMID: 32152869


447. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;13:1753466619891520. doi: 
10.1177/1753466619891520.

Duration of treatment with inhaled corticosteroids in nonasthmatic eosinophilic 
bronchitis: a randomized open label trial.

Zhan W(1), Tang J(1), Chen X(1), Yi F(1), Han L(1), Liu B(1), Luo W(1), Chen 
Q(1), Lai K(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research 
Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, the 
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
P. R. China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research 
Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, the 
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510120, 
Guangdong, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Nonasthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis (NAEB) responds well to inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS), while recurrence is common after discontinuing treatment. 
There are no data available to show whether treatment duration of ICS in 
patients with NAEB is related to recurrence. We aim to evaluate the effect of 
different duration of treatment with ICS on relapse of NAEB.
METHODS: A total of 101 patients with NAEB were recruited to the open label, 
randomized, parallel-group trial. Patients were randomized to receive 1-month, 
2-month, or 4-month treatment with inhaled budesonide (200 μg, twice daily). 
Sputum induction, cough visual analogue scale (VAS), and cough symptom score 
(CSS) were conducted at baseline and after completion of treatment. The patients 
were followed up for 1 year after treatment. The primary outcome was the relapse 
rate of NAEB in 1 year.
RESULTS: ICS significantly decreased cough VAS, CSS, and sputum eosinophilia 
among these groups. There were no statistically significant between-group 
differences in cough VAS, CSS scores, and sputum eosinophil counts at the end of 
treatment, and no significant between-group differences in those changes from 
baseline to post-treatment. Significantly, more participants in the 1-month 
treatment group experienced a recurring episode of NAEB than those in the 
3-month treatment group (41.9% versus 12.0%, p = 0.0137) at 1-year follow-up. 
The 2-month treatment group showed a lower tendency, with a relapse rate of 
20.0% (p = 0.0644).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that inhaled corticosteroids should be 
administrated for at least 2 months to reduce the relapse of NAEB.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: The study was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov 
(NCT02002715). The reviews of this paper are available via the supplemental 
material section.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466619891520
PMCID: PMC6920589
PMID: 31847717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests


448. Korean J Intern Med. 2020 Feb 27. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2019.111. Online ahead of 
print.

Impact of gender on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease outcomes: a propensity 
score-matched analysis of a prospective cohort study.

Cho J(1), Lee CH(1), Kim DK(2), Hwang HG(3), Kim YI(4), Choi HS(5), Park JW(6), 
Yoo KH(7), Jung KS(8), Lee SD(9); KOLD and KOCOSS Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul National University Boramae 
Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Division of Respiratory, Department of Internal Medicine, Soonchunhyang 
University Gumi Hospital, Gumi, Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Chonnam National University Hospital, 
Gwangju, Korea.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Hallym University Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital, Seoul, 
Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Gachon University 
Gil Medical Center, Incheon, Korea.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Konkuk University Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(8)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Anyang, Korea.
(9)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Despite increasing awareness of the burden of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in women, knowledge regarding gender 
differences in COPD outcomes is limited. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate whether 
COPD outcomes, including exacerbations, lung function, and symptoms differ by 
gender.
METHODS: We recruited patients with COPD from two Korean multicenter prospective 
cohorts. After propensity score matching, the main outcome, the incidence of 
moderate or severe exacerbations was analyzed using a negative binomial 
regression model. We also assessed changes in lung function and symptom scores 
including the St. George's respiratory questionnaire for COPD (SGRQ-C), COPD 
assessment test (CAT), and the modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) dyspnea 
score.
RESULTS: After propensity score matching, 74 women and 74 men with COPD were 
included. The incidence rates of exacerbations in women and men were not 
significantly different (incidence rate ratio, 1.49; 95% confidence interval 
[CI], 0.88 to 2.54). There was no significant difference in the incidence rates 
adjusted for medication possession ratios of long-acting muscarinic antagonists, 
long-acting β-agonists, and inhaled corticosteroids during the follow-up period 
(incidence rate ratio, 1.47; 95% CI, 0.86 to 2.52). Rates of decline in 
post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second and forced vital 
capacity did not differ between women and men during 48 months of follow-up. The 
changes in scores on the SGRQ-C, CAT, and mMRC Questionnaire in women were also 
similar to those in men.
CONCLUSIONS: We observed no gender differences in the rate of exacerbations of 
COPD in a prospective longitudinal study. Further studies are needed to confirm 
these findings in the general COPD population.

DOI: 10.3904/kjim.2019.111
PMID: 32098456


449. Adv Ther. 2019 Apr;36(4):962-968. doi: 10.1007/s12325-019-00911-y. Epub 2019 Mar 
6.

Dose Determination for a Fixed-Dose Drug Combination: A Phase II Randomized 
Controlled Trial for Tiotropium/Olodaterol Versus Tiotropium in Patients with 
COPD.

Maltais F(1), Hamilton A(2), Voß F(3), Maleki-Yazdi MR(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Center, Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de 
Québec, Université Laval, Québec City, Québec, Canada. 
Francois.Maltais@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd., Burlington, ON, Canada.
(3)Biostatistics and Data Sciences Corp., Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. 
KG, Ingelheim Am Rhein, Germany.
(4)Women's College Hospital, Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Comment in
    Adv Ther. 2019 Dec;36(12):3291-3298.

INTRODUCTION: During the clinical development of a fixed-dose combination of 
drugs, it is best practice to conduct dose-finding studies to determine the 
optimal dose of each component. The aims of this phase II dose-finding study 
were to confirm the lung function benefit of adding olodaterol to tiotropium, 
describe the dose-response relationship of olodaterol in combination with 
tiotropium 5 μg, and compare it with the dose response of olodaterol 
monotherapy.
METHODS: In this double-blind, parallel-group trial, patients were randomized to 
receive either tiotropium 5 μg or a fixed-dose combination of tiotropium 5 μg 
with olodaterol 2 μg, 5 μg, or 10 μg, delivered once daily via the Respimat® for 
4 weeks (NCT00696020). Patients had a diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease and post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) ≥ 30 
and < 80% of predicted normal. The primary endpoint was trough FEV1 response 
(change from baseline) after 4 weeks. Secondary endpoints included FEV1 and 
forced vital capacity (FVC) over 6 h after dosing.
RESULTS: Compared with tiotropium 5 μg, mean (standard error) trough FEV1 
increased with the addition of olodaterol 2 μg by 0.024 L (0.027), olodaterol 
5 μg by 0.033 L (0.027), and olodaterol 10 μg by 0.057 L (0.027). Statistically 
significant improvements in FEV1 versus tiotropium were seen across all 
timepoints up to 6 h with all doses of tiotropium/olodaterol. Similar results 
were observed for FVC.
CONCLUSION: There was a benefit of tiotropium/olodaterol compared with 
tiotropium monotherapy in FEV1 and FVC. There was a dose-response relationship 
for olodaterol on top of tiotropium for FEV1 and FVC similar to the dose 
response previously seen for olodaterol monotherapy. These results, together 
with the results of a study investigating the dose response of tiotropium on top 
of olodaterol, helped to inform the dose selection for the phase III studies.
FUNDING: Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-019-00911-y
PMCID: PMC6824359
PMID: 30843141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2019 Oct;28(10):1369-1376. doi: 10.1002/pds.4883. 
Epub 2019 Aug 5.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation episodes derived from 
electronic health record data validated using clinical trial data.

Sperrin M(1), Webb DJ(2), Patel P(3), Davis KJ(4), Collier S(5), Pate A(1), 
Leather DA(5), Pimenta JM(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(2)Real-World Data and Analytics, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Harlow, UK.
(3)Clinical Statistics (Respiratory), GlaxoSmithKline plc., Uxbridge, UK.
(4)Real-World Data and Analytics, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Collegeville, PA, USA.
(5)Respiratory Therapy Area Unit, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Brentford, UK.
(6)Epidemiology, Global Medical, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Uxbridge, UK.

PURPOSE: To validate an algorithm for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (AECOPD) episodes derived in an electronic health record (EHR) 
database, against AECOPD episodes collected in a randomized clinical trial using 
an electronic case report form (eCRF).
METHODS: We analyzed two data sources from the Salford Lung Study in COPD: trial 
eCRF and the Salford Integrated Record, a linked primary-secondary routine care 
EHR database of all patients in Salford. For trial participants, AECOPD episodes 
reported in eCRF were compared with algorithmically derived moderate/severe 
AECOPD episodes identified in EHR. Episode characteristics (frequency, 
duration), sensitivity, and positive predictive value (PPV) were calculated. A 
match between eCRF and EHR episodes was defined as at least 1-day overlap.
RESULTS: In the primary effectiveness analysis population (n = 2269), 3791 EHR 
episodes (mean [SD] length: 15.1 [3.59] days; range: 14-54) and 4403 
moderate/severe AECOPD eCRF episodes (mean length: 13.8 [16.20] days; range: 
1-372) were identified. eCRF episodes exceeding 28 days were usually broken up 
into shorter episodes in the EHR. Sensitivity was 63.6% and PPV 71.1%, where 
concordance was defined as at least 1-day overlap.
CONCLUSIONS: The EHR algorithm performance was acceptable, indicating that 
EHR-derived AECOPD episodes may provide an efficient, valid method of data 
collection. Comparing EHR-derived AECOPD episodes with those collected by eCRF 
resulted in slightly fewer episodes, and eCRF episodes of extreme lengths were 
poorly captured in EHR. Analysis of routinely collected EHR data may be 
reasonable when relative, rather than absolute, rates of AECOPD are relevant for 
stakeholders' decision making.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.4883
PMCID: PMC7028141
PMID: 31385428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: David J. Webb, Pintal Patel, Susan Collier, 
David A. Leather, and Jeanne M. Pimenta are employee of GlaxoSmithKline plc. and 
hold stocks/shares in GlaxoSmithKline plc.; Kourtney J. Davis was a former 
employee of GlaxoSmithKline plc. (employee of GlaxoSmithKline plc. at time of 
writing) and is a current employee of Janssen/J&J. Matthew Sperrin and Alexander 
Pate declare no conflict of interest.


451. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Jan 8;15:43-56. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S223638. 
eCollection 2020.

Efficacy And Safety Of Glycopyrrolate/Formoterol Fumarate Metered Dose Inhaler 
(GFF MDI) Formulated Using Co-Suspension Delivery Technology In Chinese Patients 
With COPD.

Chen R(1), Zhong N(2), Wang HY(3), Zhao L(4), Mei X(5), Qin Z(6), Huang J(7), 
Assam PN(8), Maes A(9), Siddiqui S(10), Martin UJ(10), Reisner C(9).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Shenzhen People's Hospital, 
Shenzhen, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.
(2)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, State Key Laboratory of 
Respiratory Diseases, National Clinical Research Centre for Respiratory 
Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
People's Republic of China.
(3)Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China.
(4)Sheng Jing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, People's 
Republic of China.
(5)Anhui Provincial Hospital, Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.
(6)The People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning City, 
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, People's Republic of China.
(7)Formerly of AstraZeneca, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(8)AstraZeneca, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(9)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(10)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI) is 
a long-acting muscarinic antagonist/long-acting β2-agonist fixed-dose 
combination therapy delivered by MDI, formulated using innovative co-suspension 
delivery technology. The PINNACLE-4 study evaluated the efficacy and safety of 
GFF MDI in patients with moderate-to-very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) from Asia, Europe, and the USA. This article presents the results 
from the China subpopulation of PINNACLE-4.
METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group 
Phase III study (NCT02343458), patients received GFF MDI 18/9.6 µg, 
glycopyrrolate (GP) MDI 18 µg, formoterol fumarate (FF) MDI 9.6 µg, or placebo 
MDI (all twice daily) for 24 weeks. The primary endpoint was change from 
baseline in morning pre-dose trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second at Week 
24. Secondary lung function endpoints and patient-reported outcome measures were 
also assessed. Safety was monitored throughout the study.
RESULTS: Overall, 466 patients from China were included in the intent-to-treat 
population (mean age 63.6 years, 95.7% male). Treatment with GFF MDI improved 
the primary endpoint compared to GP MDI, FF MDI, and placebo MDI (least squares 
mean differences: 98, 104, and 173 mL, respectively; all P≤0.0001). GFF MDI also 
improved daily total symptom scores and time to first clinically important 
deterioration versus monocomponents and placebo MDI, and Transition Dyspnea 
Index focal score versus placebo MDI. Rates of treatment-emergent adverse events 
were similar across the active treatment groups and slightly higher in the 
placebo MDI group.
CONCLUSION: GFF MDI improved lung function and daily symptoms versus 
monocomponents and placebo MDI and improved dyspnea versus placebo MDI. All 
treatments were well tolerated with no unexpected safety findings. Efficacy and 
safety results were generally consistent with the global PINNACLE-4 population, 
supporting the use of GFF MDI in patients with COPD from China.

© 2020 Chen et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S223638
PMCID: PMC6956867
PMID: 32021143

Conflict of interest statement: RC is an advisory committee member and speaker 
for AstraZeneca. NZ has received consultancy and lecture fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim and Novartis and was on the advisory board of the Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) committee. XM and ZQ are speakers 
for AstraZeneca. JH and PNA are employees of AstraZeneca Shanghai, People's 
Republic of China. AM, SS, UJM, and CR are employees of AstraZeneca, with stock 
options. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


452. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2019 Jul 18;27:e3148. doi: 10.1590/1518-8345.2624.3148.

Analysis of two questionnaires on quality of life of Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease patients.

Ayora AF(1), Soler LM(2), Gasch AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Universitat Jaume I, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Castellón de la Plana, 
Comunidad Valenciana, Espanha.
(2)Universidad de Alicante, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Alicante, 
Comunidad Valenciana, Espanha.

OBJECTIVE: to evaluate the efficacy of quality of life questionnaires St. George 
Respiratory Questionnaire and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Assessment 
Test in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease based on correlation 
and agreement analyses, and identify the most effective tool to assess their 
quality of life.
METHOD: cross-sectional cohort study with patients hospitalized in a Spanish 
hospital for exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Health-related quality of life was assessed with both questionnaires. The 
correlation and the agreement between the questionnaires were analyzed, as well 
as the internal consistency. Associations were established between the clinical 
variables and the results of the questionnaire.
RESULTS: one hundred and fifty-six patients participated in the study. The 
scales had a correlation and agreement between them and high internal 
consistency. A higher sensitivity of the Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
Assessment Test was observed for the presence of cough and expectoration.
CONCLUSION: the questionnaires have similar reliability and validity to measure 
the quality of life in patients with acute chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, and the Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Assessment Test is more 
sensitive to detect cough and expectoration and requires a shorter time to be 
completed.

Publisher: OBJETIVO: avaliar a eficácia entre os questionários de qualidade de 
vida St. George Respiratory Questionnaire e Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease Assessment Test em pacientes com doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica a 
partir da análise de correlação e concordância, bem como identificar a 
ferramenta mais eficaz para avaliar sua qualidade de vida.
MÉTODO: estudo analítico de coorte transversal com pacientes internados em um 
hospital espanhol para exacerbação de doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica. A 
qualidade de vida relacionada à saúde foi avaliada com os dois questionários. 
Analisaram-se a correlação e a concordância entre ambos, bem como a consistência 
interna. As associações foram estabelecidas entre as variáveis clínicas e os 
resultados do questionário.
RESULTADOS: participaram 156 pacientes. Ambas as escalas mostram correlação e 
concordância entre elas e alta consistência interna. Uma maior sensibilidade do 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Assessment Test foi observada para 
detectar a presença de tosse e expectoração.
CONCLUSÃO: ambos os questionários têm a mesma confiabilidade e validade para 
medir a qualidade de vida em pacientes com doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica 
aguda, sendo que o Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Assessment é mais 
sensível para detectar a tosse e a expectoração e com um tempo de preenchimento 
mais curto.

Publisher: OBJETIVO: evaluar la efectividad entre los cuestionarios de la 
calidad de vida St. George Respiratory Questionnaire y Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease Assessment Test en pacientes con enfermedad pulmonar 
obstructiva crónica a partir del análisis de su correlación y concordancia, e 
identificar la herramienta más efectiva para evaluar su calidad de vida.
MÉTODO: estudio analítico transversal en pacientes ingresados en un hospital 
español por exacerbación de la enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crónica. Se 
estudió la calidad de vida relacionada con la salud evaluada con los dos 
cuestionarios. Se analizó la correlación y concordancia entre ambos, así como su 
consistencia interna. Se establecieron asociaciones entre las variables clínicas 
y los resultados del cuestionario.
RESULTADOS: participaron 156 pacientes. Ambas escalas muestran correlación y 
concordancia entre ellas y consistencia interna elevada. Se observa una mayor 
sensibilidad del cuestionario Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Assessment 
Test para detectar la presencia de tos y expectoración.
CONCLUSIÓN: ambos cuestionarios presentan la misma fiabilidad y validez para 
medir la calidad de vida en pacientes con enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva 
crónica agudizada, siendo el Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Assessment 
Test más sensible para detectar tos y expectoración y con un tiempo de 
cumplimentación más breve.

OBJETIVO: avaliar a eficácia entre os questionários de qualidade de vida St. 
George Respiratory Questionnaire e Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
Assessment Test em pacientes com doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica a partir da 
análise de correlação e concordância, bem como identificar a ferramenta mais 
eficaz para avaliar sua qualidade de vida.
MÉTODO: estudo analítico de coorte transversal com pacientes internados em um 
hospital espanhol para exacerbação de doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica. A 
qualidade de vida relacionada à saúde foi avaliada com os dois questionários. 
Analisaram-se a correlação e a concordância entre ambos, bem como a consistência 
interna. As associações foram estabelecidas entre as variáveis clínicas e os 
resultados do questionário.
RESULTADOS: participaram 156 pacientes. Ambas as escalas mostram correlação e 
concordância entre elas e alta consistência interna. Uma maior sensibilidade do 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Assessment Test foi observada para 
detectar a presença de tosse e expectoração.
CONCLUSÃO: ambos os questionários têm a mesma confiabilidade e validade para 
medir a qualidade de vida em pacientes com doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica 
aguda, sendo que o Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Assessment é mais 
sensível para detectar a tosse e a expectoração e com um tempo de preenchimento 
mais curto.

OBJETIVO: evaluar la efectividad entre los cuestionarios de la calidad de vida 
St. George Respiratory Questionnaire y Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
Assessment Test en pacientes con enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crónica a 
partir del análisis de su correlación y concordancia, e identificar la 
herramienta más efectiva para evaluar su calidad de vida.
MÉTODO: estudio analítico transversal en pacientes ingresados en un hospital 
español por exacerbación de la enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crónica. Se 
estudió la calidad de vida relacionada con la salud evaluada con los dos 
cuestionarios. Se analizó la correlación y concordancia entre ambos, así como su 
consistencia interna. Se establecieron asociaciones entre las variables clínicas 
y los resultados del cuestionario.
RESULTADOS: participaron 156 pacientes. Ambas escalas muestran correlación y 
concordancia entre ellas y consistencia interna elevada. Se observa una mayor 
sensibilidad del cuestionario Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Assessment 
Test para detectar la presencia de tos y expectoración.
CONCLUSIÓN: ambos cuestionarios presentan la misma fiabilidad y validez para 
medir la calidad de vida en pacientes con enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva 
crónica agudizada, siendo el Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Assessment 
Test más sensible para detectar tos y expectoración y con un tiempo de 
cumplimentación más breve.

DOI: 10.1590/1518-8345.2624.3148
PMCID: PMC6687364
PMID: 31340341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Apr 22;15:857-868. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S238457. eCollection 2020.

Malnutrition, Airflow Limitation and Severe Emphysema are Risks for Exacerbation 
of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in Japanese Subjects: A Retrospective 
Single-Center Study.

Yamaya M(1), Usami O(2), Nakayama S(3), Tode N(4), Yamada A(5), Ito S(2), Omata 
F(2), Momma H(5), Funakubo M(6), Ichinose M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Preventive Medicine for Infectious Disease, Tohoku 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kurihara Central Hospital, Kurihara 
987-2205, Japan.
(3)Department of Medicine, Kurihara Central Hospital, Kurihara 987-2205, Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.
(5)Department of Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.
(6)Department of Radiology, Kurihara Central Hospital, Kurihara 987-2205, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Different characteristics of patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) between Western and Japanese populations have been 
reported. Risk factors for COPD exacerbation have been reported in Western 
countries but have not been studied in Japan.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively examined risk factors for COPD 
exacerbation. A total of 156 Japanese patients were enrolled, and the records of 
136 patients were analyzed.
RESULTS: In the exacerbation group (n=60), body mass index, forced vital 
capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), the FEV1/FVC 
ratio (FEV1/FVC), the percent predicted values of FEV1 (%FEV1), and serum total 
protein (TP) and albumin concentrations were lower, and age, mortality rate, 
frequency of common cold and pneumonia, COPD severity rankings, modified Medical 
Research Council (mMRC) dyspnea score, and proportions of patients with severe 
emphysema (>50% of low attenuation area) and receiving long-term oxygen therapy 
were higher than those in the nonexacerbation group (n=76). However, the 
proportion of patients with a greater number of eosinophils (≥200/μL and/or ≥2%) 
and the exhaled nitric oxide concentration did not differ between the two 
groups. In the univariate analysis, the risk factors for exacerbation were age; 
long-term oxygen therapy; low FVC, FEV1, FEV1/FVC and %FEV1; high COPD severity 
ranking and mMRC score; severe emphysema; hypoproteinemia (<6.5 g/dL); 
hypoalbuminemia (<3.5 g/dL); leukocytosis; lymphocytopenia; and anemia. In the 
multivariate analysis, the risk factors were hypoalbuminemia, hypoproteinemia 
and low FEV1. Additionally, in patients in the exacerbation-induced mortality 
subgroup, age, exacerbation frequency, mMRC score and the proportion of patients 
with lymphocytopenia were higher, and FVC, %FVC, FEV1, serum TP concentration 
and the lymphocyte number were lower than those in the exacerbation survival 
subgroup.
CONCLUSION: Malnutrition, airflow limitation and severe emphysema were risks for 
exacerbation and mortality associated with infection in Japanese patients with 
COPD.

© 2020 Yamaya et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S238457
PMCID: PMC7183777
PMID: 32368031

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


454. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2020 Jan-Dec;14:1753466620916990. doi: 
10.1177/1753466620916990.

Functional respiratory imaging assessment of glycopyrrolate and formoterol 
fumarate metered dose inhalers formulated using co-suspension delivery 
technology in patients with COPD.

De Backer W(1), De Backer J(2), Verlinden I(3), Leemans G(3), Van Holsbeke C(4), 
Mignot B(4), Jenkins M(5), Griffis D(6), Ivanov S(7), Fitzpatrick J(8), St Rose 
E(8), Martin UJ(9), Reisner C(8).

Author information:
(1)University of Antwerp, Campus Drie Eiken, Universiteitsplein 1, Wilrijk, 2610 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)FLUIDDA, Inc, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Formerly of FLUIDDA NV, Kontich, Belgium.
(4)FLUIDDA NV, Kontich, Belgium.
(5)AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(6)AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.
(7)AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(8)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(9)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Functional respiratory imaging (FRI) is a quantitative 
postprocessing imaging technique used to assess changes in the respiratory 
system. Using FRI, we characterized the effects of the long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA), glycopyrrolate metered dose inhaler (GP MDI), and the 
long-acting β2-agonist (LABA), formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (FF 
MDI), on airway volume and resistance in patients with moderate-to-severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
METHODS: Patients in this phase IIIb, randomized, double-blind crossover study 
received twice-daily GP MDI (18 μg) and FF MDI (9.6 μg). Primary endpoints were 
specific (i.e. corrected for lobar volume) image-based airway volume (siVaw) and 
specific image-based airway resistance (siRaw), measured using FRI. Secondary 
and other endpoints included additional FRI, spirometry, and body 
plethysmography parameters. Postdose efficacy assessments were performed within 
60-150 min of dosing on day 15.
RESULTS: A total of 23 patients were randomized and 19 completed both treatment 
periods. GP MDI and FF MDI both achieved significant improvements from baseline 
to day 15 in siVaw [11% (p = 0.0187) and 23% (p < 0.0001) increases, 
respectively] and siRaw [25% (p = 0.0219) and 44% (p < 0.0001) reductions, 
respectively]. Although, on average, improvements were larger for FF MDI than GP 
MDI, some individuals displayed greater responses with each of the two 
treatments. These within-patient differences increased with airway generation 
number. Spirometry and body plethysmography endpoints showed significant 
improvements from baseline in inspiratory capacity for both treatments, and 
numeric improvements for other endpoints.
CONCLUSION: Both GP MDI and FF MDI significantly improved siRaw and siVaw at day 
15 versus baseline. FRI endpoints demonstrated increased sensitivity relative to 
spirometry and body plethysmography in detecting differences between treatments 
in a small number of patients. Intra-patient differences in treatment response 
between the LAMA and the LABA provide further support for the benefit of dual 
bronchodilator therapies.
CLINICALTRIALS.GOV REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02937584 The reviews of this paper 
are available via the supplemental material section.

DOI: 10.1177/1753466620916990
PMCID: PMC7225799
PMID: 32380894

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: WDB has no real 
or perceived conflicts of interest that relate to this manuscript. His 
department has received grants from AstraZeneca, Chiesi, and GlaxoSmithKline. 
JDB is the Chief Executive Officer and founder of FLUIDDA, and holds shares in 
the company. CVH and BM are employees of FLUIDDA, and GL and IV are former 
employees of FLUIDDA. MJ, DG, SI, JF, ESR, UJM, and CR are employees of 
AstraZeneca.


455. Pulmonology. 2019 Nov-Dec;25(6):348-354. doi: 10.1016/j.pulmoe.2019.08.001. Epub 
2019 Oct 5.

High flow through nasal cannula in exacerbated COPD patients: a systematic 
review.

Pisani L(1), Astuto M(2), Prediletto I(3), Longhini F(4).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory and Critical Care Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Alma Mater 
University, Bologna, Italy. Electronic address: lara.pisani@aosp.bo.it.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Catania, 
Catania, Italy.
(3)Respiratory and Critical Care Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Alma Mater 
University, Bologna, Italy.
(4)Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital Mater Domini, Department of Medical 
and Surgical Sciences, Magna Graecia University, Catanzaro, Italy.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) history is characterized by 
episodes of exacerbation of varying severity, featured by acute worsening of 
respiratory symptoms, commonly precipitated by respiratory tract infection. The 
recent ERS/ATS clinical practice guidelines strongly recommend the application 
of non invasive ventilation (NIV) for patients with acute respiratory failure 
(ARF) leading to acute or acute-on-chronic respiratory acidosis (pH 7.35) and 
not for those patients with acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) and hypercapnia 
who are not acidotic. In recent years, High-Flow through Nasal Cannula (HFNC) 
has been introduced in the clinical practice. We designed the present systematic 
review of the literature to assess all effects of HFNC use reported in 
exacerbated COPD patients. In this setting, HFNC is able to keep PaCO2 
unmodified, while oxygenation slightly deteriorates as opposed to NIV. 
Furthermore, the work of breathing is reduced with HFNC by a similar extent to 
NIV, while it increases by 40-50% during conventional oxygen therapy (COT). HFNC 
is also reported to be more comfortable than COT and NIV. Despite these results, 
little and limited evidence for improved clinical outcomes is currently 
available.

Copyright © 2019 Sociedade Portuguesa de Pneumologia. Published by Elsevier 
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pulmoe.2019.08.001
PMID: 31591056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Mar;99(10):e19396. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000019396.

A randomized controlled trial for prevention of acute exacerbation of stable 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with acupoint application of traditional 
Chinese medicine: Study protocol clinical trial (SPIRIT Compliant).

Zhang C(1), Yang H(1), Gan W(1), Chen J(2), Yang Y(1), Xiao W(1), Long K(2), 
Chen K(1), Huang Q(1), Gao P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine.
(2)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Hospital of Chengdu University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, PR China.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major public 
health problem that severely affects the quality of life of patients and may 
even endanger their lives. Although modern medicine has achieved significant 
results in relieving the clinical manifestations of COPD, it is difficult to 
prevent its progression and acute exacerbation entirely. As one of the classic 
aspects of acupuncture and moxibustion therapy, acupoint application of 
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) can improve the clinical efficacy of western 
medicine in treating COPD. To date, however,there is no high-quality clinical 
trial to assess the effectiveness of TCM acupoint application directly in 
preventing acute exacerbation of stable COPD.
METHODS: The study is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, in 
which 200 stable COPD patients will be randomly and equally divided into the 
experimental group or control group. Both groups will undergo standard Western 
medicine treatment; however, the patients in the experimental group will be also 
treated with TCM acupoint application, while the control group will be given 
placebo acupoint application. The duration of the treatment will be 1 month and 
a follow-up for 11 months. The primary outcome will be the number of acute 
exacerbation episodes of COPD, and the secondary outcomes will include the lung 
function, St George's Respiratory Questionnaire, COPD Assessment Test, and 
6-Minute Walk Test. A safety assessment will also be performed during the trial.
DISCUSSION: The aim of this study is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of TCM 
acupoint application in preventing acute exacerbation of stable COPD. Our study 
will provide sound evidence to support the evidence-based medicine of TCM 
acupoint application as an additional measure in the prevention of acute 
exacerbation of stable COPD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ChiCTR1900026564, Registered 14 October, 2019.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000019396
PMID: 32150085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Respir Res. 2020 Mar 4;21(1):63. doi: 10.1186/s12931-020-1323-4.

Adaptive NKG2C+ natural killer cells are related to exacerbations and 
nutritional abnormalities in COPD patients.

Pascual-Guardia S(1)(2)(3)(4), Ataya M(5), Ramírez-Martínez I(6)(7), Yélamos 
J(5)(6), Chalela R(8)(5)(9)(10), Bellido S(8)(5), López-Botet M(5)(9)(10)(6), 
Gea J(8)(5)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Department, Hospital del Mar, Pg. Marítim 27, 08003, Barcelona, 
Spain. spascual@parcdesalutmar.cat.
(2)Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain. 
spascual@parcdesalutmar.cat.
(3)CIBERES, ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain. spascual@parcdesalutmar.cat.
(4)Health and Experimental Sciences Department (CEXS), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 
Barcelona, Spain. spascual@parcdesalutmar.cat.
(5)Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Immunology Department, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Psychiatry department, Hospital Torrecardenas, Almería, Spain.
(8)Respiratory Department, Hospital del Mar, Pg. Marítim 27, 08003, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(9)CIBERES, ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Health and Experimental Sciences Department (CEXS), Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Barcelona Respiratory Network, Barcelona, Spain.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic and often progressive 
disorder with a heterogeneous presentation and frequent systemic manifestations. 
Several aspects like persistence in smoking habit, continuous exacerbations, 
alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency and inflammatory-immune response, are involved in 
the pathophysiology and progression of the disease. However, the role of natural 
killer (NK) cells remains controversial. Otherwise, human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) 
infection has been reported to induce an adaptive differentiation and expansion 
of an NK cell subset which carries the CD94/NKG2C receptor, which may contribute 
to an upset immune defense. For these reasons, our objective is to assess the 
distribution of NK cells and their subset in COPD patients and some of its 
phenotypes.
METHODS: Peripheral blood samples were obtained from 66 COPD patients. HCMV 
serology and the proportions of total NK cells and the NKG2C+ and NKG2A+ subsets 
were evaluated by flow cytometry. The NKG2C genotype was also assessed.
RESULTS: Eighty-eight per cent of COPD patients were HCMV(+), and the 
proportions of total NK cells were higher in patients with severe-very severe 
airway obstruction than in those with only mild-moderate involvement. There were 
no differences in the proportions of NKG2C+ cells between controls and COPD, 
either among COPD patients classified by severity of the disease. However, the 
percentage of NKG2C+ cells were higher in COPD patients with frequent 
exacerbations than in occasional exacerbators, and higher in cases with reduced 
lean mass (Fat free mass index) than in those with normal nutritional status.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest a relationship between levels of NKG2C+ cells 
in COPD patients and clinical variables closely linked to a poor/worse 
prognosis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-020-1323-4
PMCID: PMC7057582
PMID: 32131843

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


458. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2020 Feb 26;48(283):65-68.

Azithromycin in the treatment of patients with exacerbation of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Płusa T(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Faculty of the Lazarski University in Warsaw, Poland.

The beneficial effects of low dose azithromycin on reducing the number of 
exacerbations in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have 
been the subject of many clinical studies. Long-term administration of low dose 
azithromycin is known to suppress proinflammatory cytokine production, 
potentiate macrophage phagocytosis and anti-inflammatory cytokine expression. 
The effect of azithromycin is also associated with a decrease in the expression 
of human HLA (human leukocyte antigen) complex molecules in the respiratory 
tract, including HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-DPA1, HLA-DRA, HLA-DRB4. In contrast, 
inhibition of viral infections by azithromycin is caused by a suppressive effect 
on the production of viral interferon. In the COLUMBUS study conducted in 92 
COPD patients with frequent exacerbations who were given azithromycin for a 
year, inflammatory markers, eosinophilia, and GOLD severity were analyzed. It 
was found that the antibiotic therapy was most effective in patients with COPD 
with frequent exacerbations in GOLD 1 and 2 and GOLD C, as well as in patients 
with blood eosinophilia over 2%. An analysis of the costs of prophylactic 
administration of chronic azithromycin in patients with COPD in Belgium showed 
that the cost would be EUR 595 million, saving EUR 950 million for the treatment 
of COPD exacerbations. According to the recommendations in GOLD2020, 
azithromycin (250 mg or 500 mg daily three times a week) for 1 year in COPD 
patients significantly reduces the number of exacerbations.

© 2020 MEDPRESS.

PMID: 32218410


459. Minerva Med. 2019 Dec;110(6):555-563. doi: 10.23736/S0026-4806.19.06273-6. Epub 
2019 Jul 30.

Non-invasive ventilation in palliative care: a systematic review.

Diaz de Teran T(1), Barbagelata E(2), Cilloniz C(3)(4), Nicolini A(5), Perazzo 
T(6), Perren A(7), Ocak Serin S(8), Scharffenberg M(9), Fiorentino G(10), 
Zaccagnini M(11), Khatib MI(12), Papadakos P(13), Rezaul Karim HM(14), Solidoro 
P(15), Esquinas A(16).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Sleep and Non-Invasive Ventilation, Marqués de Valdecilla University 
Hospital, Santander, Spain.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, General Hospital of Sestri Levante, Sestri 
Levante, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Department of Pneumology, Clinical Institute of Thoracic Surgery, August Pi i 
Sunyer Institute of Biomedical Research (IDIBAPS), Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, 
University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Unit SGR 911, Center for Biomedical Network Research for Respiratory Diseases 
(CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Respiratory Diseases, General Hospital of Sestri Levante, 
Sestri Levante, Genoa, Italy - antonellonicolini@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Respiratory Diseases, General Hospital of Sestri Levante, 
Sestri Levante, Genoa, Italy.
(7)Department of Intensive Care, Regional Hospital of Bellinzona, Bellinzona, 
Switzerland.
(8)University of Health Science, Umraniye Training and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(9)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Carl Gustav Carus 
Faculty of Medicine, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(10)Unit of Respiratory Pathophysiology, Diseases, and Rehabilitation, Monaldi 
Hospital, Ospedali dei Colli, Naples, Italy.
(11)Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care, McGill University Health Center, 
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(12)Department of Anesthesiology, School of Medicine, American University of 
Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(13)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.
(14)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Raipur, India.
(15)Unit of Pneumology U, Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, 
Molinette Hospital, Città della Salute e della Scienza, University of Turin, 
Turin, Italy.
(16)Unit of Intensive Care, Morales Meseguer Hospital, Murcia, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: An ageing population and steady increase in the rates of neoplasms 
and chronic degenerative diseases poses a challenge for societies and their 
healthcare systems. Because of the recent and continued advances in therapies, 
such as the development and widespread use of non-invasive ventilation (NIV), 
survival rates have increased for these pathologies. For patients with end-stage 
chronic respiratory diseases, the use of NIV following the onset of acute or 
severe chronic respiratory failure is a valid option when intubation has been 
excluded.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: The following electronic databases were searched from 
their inception to January 2000 to December 2017: MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINHAIL, 
CENTRAL (Cochrane Central register of Controlled Trials), DARE (Database of 
Abstracts of Reviews of Effectiveness), the Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, ACP Journal Club database.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: The available evidence strongly supports the use of NIV in 
patients presenting with an exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, as well end-stage neuromuscular disease. Few studies support the use of 
NIV in end-stage interstitial lung disease and in morbid obesity patients. In 
patients with cancer has been recommend offering NIV as palliative care to 
improve dyspnea.
CONCLUSIONS: The decision regarding the treatment should be made by the patient, 
ideally before reaching the terminal stage and after having a frank dialogue 
with healthcare professionals and family members.

DOI: 10.23736/S0026-4806.19.06273-6
PMID: 31359741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020 Apr 10:S0091-6749(20)30427-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2020.03.021. Online ahead of print.

Bronchial mucosal inflammation and illness severity in response to experimental 
rhinovirus infection in COPD.

Zhu J(1), Mallia P(2), Footitt J(2), Qiu Y(1), Message SD(2), Kebadze T(1), 
Aniscenko J(1), Barnes PJ(1), Adcock IM(1), Kon OM(2), Johnson M(3), Contoli 
M(4), Stanciu LA(1), Papi A(5), Jeffery PK(1), Johnston SL(6).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.
(2)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom; 
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, Middlesex, United Kingdom.
(4)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom; 
Research Centre on Asthma and COPD, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(5)Research Centre on Asthma and COPD, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(6)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom; 
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: s.johnston@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Respiratory viral infection causes chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) exacerbations. We previously reported increased bronchial mucosa 
eosinophil and neutrophil inflammation in patients with COPD experiencing 
naturally occurring exacerbations. But it is unclear whether virus per se 
induces bronchial mucosal inflammation, nor whether this relates to exacerbation 
severity.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to determine the extent and nature of bronchial mucosal 
inflammation following experimental rhinovirus (RV)-16-induced COPD 
exacerbations and its relationship to disease severity.
METHODS: Bronchial mucosal inflammatory cell phenotypes were determined at 
preinfection baseline and following experimental RV infection in 17 Global 
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease stage II subjects with COPD and 
as controls 20 smokers and 11 nonsmokers with normal lung function. No subject 
had a history of asthma/allergic rhinitis: all had negative results for 
aeroallergen skin prick tests.
RESULTS: RV infection increased the numbers of bronchial mucosal eosinophils and 
neutrophils only in COPD and CD8+ T lymphocytes in patients with COPD and 
nonsmokers. Monocytes/macrophages, CD4+ T lymphocytes, and CD20+ B lymphocytes 
were increased in all subjects. At baseline, compared with nonsmokers, subjects 
with COPD and smokers had increased numbers of bronchial mucosal 
monocytes/macrophages and CD8+ T lymphocytes but fewer numbers of CD4+ T 
lymphocytes and CD20+ B lymphocytes. The virus-induced inflammatory cells in 
patients with COPD were positively associated with virus load, illness severity, 
and reductions in lung function.
CONCLUSIONS: Experimental RV infection induces bronchial mucosal eosinophilia 
and neutrophilia only in patients with COPD and monocytes/macrophages and 
lymphocytes in both patients with COPD and control subjects. The virus-induced 
inflammatory cell phenotypes observed in COPD positively related to virus load 
and illness severity. Antiviral/anti-inflammatory therapies could attenuate 
bronchial inflammation and ameliorate virus-induced COPD exacerbations.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.03.021
PMCID: PMC7173046
PMID: 32283204


461. Rev Clin Esp. 2020 Mar;220(2):79-85. doi: 10.1016/j.rce.2019.05.003. Epub 2019 
Jun 14.

Social and clinical predictors associated with prolonged hospital stays for 
patients with severe exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Fernández-García S(1), Represas-Represas C(1), Ruano-Raviña A(2), Botana-Rial 
M(1), Mouronte-Roibas C(1), Ramos-Hernández C(1), Fernández Villar A(3).

Author information:
(1)Grupo NeumoVigo I+i, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Galicia Sur 
(IISGS), Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Álvaro Cunqueiro, Vigo, Pontevedra, 
España.
(2)Área de Medicina Preventiva y Salud Pública, Universidad de Santiago de 
Compostela; Servicio de Medicina Preventiva, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, La Coruña, España; CIBER de 
Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid, España.
(3)Grupo NeumoVigo I+i, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Galicia Sur 
(IISGS), Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Álvaro Cunqueiro, Vigo, Pontevedra, 
España. Electronic address: alberto.fernandez.villar@sergas.es.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether there are social factors that affect the 
prolonged hospital stay (PHS) of patients with severe chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease exacerbation (COPDE), as well as clinical-demographic factors.
METHODOLOGY: We conducted a prospective cohort study that consecutively included 
patients who were admitted to a Pneumology department for COPDE. We recorded 
demographic, clinical (tobacco use, exacerbations and infections, dyspnoea, 
impact according to CAT questionnaire, pulmonary function, comorbidities, oxygen 
therapy and noninvasive ventilation) and social (financial status, caregiver 
availability and overload, dependence for basic and instrumental activities, 
social risk and use of social services) variables, employing questionnaires and 
indices such as Barthel, Lawton-Brody, Zarit, Barber and Gijón. We performed a 
univariate and multivariate analysis using a logistic regression model.
RESULTS: The study included 253 patients, with a mean age of 68.9±9.8years; 
77.1% of whom were men. The logistic regression model included active tobacco 
use, FEV1 value, CAT score >10, dyspnoea 3-4 on the MMRC, the presence of 
bacteria in sputum cultures, cardiovascular comorbidity, anaemia, home oxygen 
therapy, living alone, rural residence, caregiver overload and detecting 
social-family risks/problems. The variables independently associated with the 
possibility of PHS were a CAT score >10 (OR, 8.9; P=.04) and detecting a 
social-family risk/problem (OR, 2.6; P=.04). Active smoking was a predictor of 
shorter stays (OR, 0.15; P=.002).
CONCLUSIONS: Variables related to the social sphere play a relevant role in 
hospital stays, as do the impact of the disease and the persistent use of 
tobacco by patients with severe COPD exacerbation.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier España, S.L.U. and Sociedad Española de Medicina 
Interna (SEMI). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rce.2019.05.003
PMID: 31208703


462. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Mar 31;15:681-690. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S240720. eCollection 2020.

Association Between Routine Blood Biomarkers and Clinical Phenotypes and 
Exacerbations in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Nuñez A(#)(1)(2), Marras V(#)(3), Harlander M(4), Mekov E(5), Esquinas C(1), 
Turel M(4), Lestan D(4), Petkov R(5), Yanev N(5), Pirina P(3), Negri S(3), 
Miravitlles M(1)(2)(6), Barrecheguren M(1).

Author information:
(1)Pneumology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d´Hebron/Vall d'Hebron 
Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Medicine Department, Autonomous University of Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Respiratory Unit, AOU Sassari, Sassari, Italy.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Medical Faculty, Medical University of 
Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(6)CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Barcelona, Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with 
increased lung and systemic inflammation. We aimed to identify associations 
between easy-to-obtain blood biomarkers and the frequency and severity of 
exacerbations.
METHODS: Cross-sectional, multicentre study performed in four centres in Spain, 
Italy, Bulgaria, and Slovenia. Blood samples were obtained for blood cell count, 
C-reactive protein (CRP), alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) and fibrinogen analysis. The 
neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio (NLR), platelet/lymphocyte ratio (PLR) and 
eosinophil/basophil ratio (EBR) were calculated. Firstly, patients were divided 
into clinical phenotypes according to the Spanish guidelines of COPD, and 
secondly, patients were classified into 2 groups: non-exacerbators (≤1 
ambulatory exacerbation in the previous year) and exacerbators (≥2 ambulatory 
exacerbations or 1 hospitalisation in the previous year). A multivariate 
stepwise logistic regression model was performed to identify laboratory 
parameters associated with exacerbators.
RESULTS: A total of 355 patients with a mean age 66 years (SD=8.9) were 
included, and 64% were male. The mean FEV1% (forced expiratory volume in the 
first second) was 55% (SD=20%), and the mean COPD Assessment Test (CAT) score 
was 15.6 (SD=7.9). One hundred ninety-six (55.2%) patients were classified in 
the non-exacerbator group, and 159 (44.8%) were exacerbators. Patients in the 
exacerbators group presented lower haemoglobin levels (p=0.019) and ERB (p= 
0.023) but higher CRP levels (p=0.001). In the multivariate analysis, females, 
higher levels of CRP, lower FEV1% and low EBR were independently related to 
exacerbators.
CONCLUSION: Female sex, having a more severe impairment of lung function, higher 
CRP levels and a lower EBR are associated with an exacerbator phenotype in COPD.

© 2020 Nuñez et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S240720
PMCID: PMC7127861
PMID: 32280207

Conflict of interest statement: Alexa Nuñez and Viviana Marras are co-first 
authors in this study. Alexa Nuñez is the recipient of a Rio Hortega contract in 
the 2019 Strategic Action Health Call from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III for 
the years 2020-2022. Viviana Marras from the University of Sassari (Italy) was 
the recipient of an Erasmus Placement for a short stay at the Pneumology 
Department of University Hospital Valld’Hebron (Barcelona, Spain). Miriam 
Barrecheguren is the recipient of a Rio Hortega contract in the 2017 Strategic 
Action Health Call from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III for the years 
2018-2019. Matevz Harlander has received speaker or consulting fees from 
AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie, Menarini, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and Teva, all unrelated to this manuscript. Evgeni 
Mekov has received speaker or consulting fees from Astra Zeneca and Chiesi, all 
unrelated to this manuscript. Cristina Esquinas has received speaker fees from 
CSL Behring. Matjaz Turel has received speaker or consulting fees from 
AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie, Menarini, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and Teva, all unrelated to this manuscript. David 
Lestan has received speaker or consulting fees from Boehringer Ingelheim and 
Roche, all unrelated to this manuscript. Rosen Petkov has received speaker or 
consulting fees from Astra Zeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim, all unrelated to 
this manuscript. Nikolay Yanev has received speaker or consulting fees from 
Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Berlin Chemie and Chiesi, all unrelated to 
this manuscript. Pietro Pirina has received speaker fees from Chiesi, Menarini, 
Novartis, Mundifarma, Glaxo Smith Kline, all unrelated to this manuscript. Marc 
Miravitlles has received speaker or consulting fees from AstraZeneca, Bial, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, CSL Behring, Laboratorios Esteve, Ferrer, 
Gebro Pharma, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Kamada, Menarini, Mereo Biopharma, 
Novartis, pH Pharma, Rovi, Sanofi, Sandoz, TEVA, Verona Pharma and Zambon, and 
research grants from GlaxoSmithKline and Grifols, unrelated to this manuscript. 
Miriam Barrecheguren has received speaker fees from Grifols, Menarini, CSL 
Behring, GSK and consulting fees from GSK, Novartis and Gebro Pharma. The 
authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


463. COPD. 2019 Feb;16(1):37-44. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1586865. Epub 2019 May 6.

Outdoor Walking Training Compared To Cycle Ergometer Training in Severe COPD: A 
Randomized Controlled Feasibility Trial.

Gamper E(1)(2), Schmidt U(2), Bansi J(3), Kool J(3).

Author information:
(1)a School of Health Professions , ZHAW Zurich University of Applied Science , 
Winterthur , Switzerland.
(2)b Rehabilitation Centre Walenstadtberg, Valens Clinics , Walenstadtberg , 
Switzerland.
(3)c Research Department, Rehabilitation Centre Valens , Valens Clinics , Valens 
, Switzerland.

Exercise can improve walking capacity in persons with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). However, most endurance training programs use cycle 
ergometers. The objectives of this study were: (i) to evaluate the feasibility 
of a randomized controlled trial (RCT) comparing outdoor walking training (OWT) 
to cycle ergometer training (CT) during inpatient rehabilitation in persons with 
severe COPD; (ii) to estimate the effect of OWT and CT on health-related quality 
of life, physical capacity and physical activity; and (iii) to estimate the 
required sample size for a RCT. A single-blind randomized controlled feasibility 
trial was conducted with three months' follow-up in the rehabilitation center in 
Walenstadtberg, Switzerland. Sixteen patients were included in the study, which 
had a recruitment rate of 33% (16/48). Patients were allocated to an OWT (n = 8) 
or CT (n = 8) group. Participants completed 75% of scheduled training and the 
follow-up rate was 75%. All participants in the OWT group were satisfied with 
the training. The OWT group had better health-related quality of life after 
three weeks' training compared to the CT group (p = 0.042, 95% confidence 
interval (95% CI) 1.06-49.94, effect size (d)=1.19). No exacerbations occurred 
in the OWT group, but three occurred in the CT group after three months' 
follow-up. There was no significant difference in the other outcomes. In 
conclusion, the study design and the OWT are feasible. Health-related quality of 
life improved in the OWT group compared to the CT group after three weeks' 
inpatient rehabilitation. A minimum of 46 participants is needed for a RCT. 
Trial registration: www.who.int/trialsearch DRKS00010977.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1586865
PMID: 31056954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Clin Respir J. 2019 Aug;13(8):521-529. doi: 10.1111/crj.13054. Epub 2019 Jul 24.

Aetiology and disease severity are among the determinants of quality of life in 
bronchiectasis.

Terpstra LC(1), Biesenbeek S(1), Altenburg J(2), Boersma WG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Northwest Clinics Alkmaar, Alkmaar, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Academic Medical Centre Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Quality of life (QoL) is known to be impaired in patients with 
bronchiectasis, which is generally attributed to exacerbations and chronic 
pulmonary symptoms. The aim of this study was to determine if aetiology and 
disease severity are associated with QoL in bronchiectasis.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis of clinical stable patients with 
bronchiectasis. Diagnostic workup into the aetiology of bronchiectasis was 
conducted according to the current guidelines. QoL was measured by QoL-B 
questionnaire (QoL-B), data on sputum microbiology, pulmonary function tests and 
the disease severity were obtained.
RESULTS: The aetiology of bronchiectasis was investigated in the total of 200 
patients. The most commonly identified aetiologies were post-infective (39.5%) 
and idiopathic (12.5%). Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD)-related bronchiectasis showed a significant lower QoL (P < .05) as 
compared to the other aetiologies. In the total population, an increasing 
disease severity as measured by FACED, E-FACED and the bronchiectasis severity 
index was correlated with a lower QoL.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that QoL in bronchiectasis is related both to 
aetiology, with worse QoL in COPD-related bronchiectasis, and to disease 
severity, which suggests more attention in advance for these specific patient 
groups with bronchiectasis.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13054
PMID: 31295770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Chron Respir Dis. 2019 Jan-Dec;16:1479973119872979. doi: 
10.1177/1479973119872979.

The de Morton mobility index is a feasible and valid mobility assessment tool in 
hospitalized patients with an acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Camp PG(1)(2), Sima CA(1), Kirkham A(1), Inskip JA(1), Parappilly B(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, Vancouver, Canada.
(3)Providence Health Care, St Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, Canada.

There is no accepted standard for measuring mobility in hospitalized patients 
with an acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD). 
The objective of this study was to assess convergent, discriminant, and 
known-group validity and floor/ceiling effects of the de Morton Mobility Index 
(DEMMI) in hospitalized patients with AECOPD. Individuals with AECOPD (n = 22) 
admitted to an acute care hospital medical ward were recruited. Data on the 
DEMMI, gait speed, daytime energy expenditure, step counts, 6-minute walk 
distance (6MWD), dyspnea, respiratory and heart rates, quality of life, and 
oxygen supplementation were collected on day 3 of admission. The DEMMI 
demonstrated convergent validity with the 6MWD and gait velocity measures 
(Spearman's ρ 0.69 and 0.61, respectively; p < 0.003) but not with measures of 
physical activity or respiratory impairment. Discriminant validity was present, 
with no correlation between the DEMMI and quality of life and resting heart 
rate. Known-group validity (gait aids vs. no gait aids) was demonstrated (p = 
0.009). There was no floor effect but there was evidence of a possible ceiling 
effect (14% of participants received a perfect score). The DEMMI is feasible and 
showed moderate to strong validity with measures of observed physical function 
in hospitalized patients with AECOPD.

DOI: 10.1177/1479973119872979
PMCID: PMC6747857
PMID: 31526037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


466. Anesth Analg. 2020 May;130(5):1407-1414. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000004733.

Effects of Inhaled Iloprost on Lung Mechanics and Myocardial Function During 
One-Lung Ventilation in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Patients Combined 
With Poor Lung Oxygenation.

Kim N(1), Lee SH(2), Joe Y(1), Kim T(1), Shin H(1), Oh YJ(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Anesthesia and Pain 
Research Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Yonsei Sarang Hospital, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The ventilation/perfusion mismatch in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) patients can exacerbate cardiac function as well as pulmonary 
oxygenation. We hypothesized that inhaled iloprost can ameliorate pulmonary 
oxygenation with lung mechanics and myocardial function during one-lung 
ventilation (OLV) in COPD patients combined with poor lung oxygenation.
METHODS: A total of 40 patients with moderate to severe COPD, who exhibited the 
ratio of partial pressure of arterial oxygen to the fraction of inspired oxygen 
(PaO2/FIO2) <150 mm Hg 30 minutes after initiating OLV, were enrolled in this 
study. Patients were randomly allocated into either ILO group (n = 20) or 
Control group (n = 20), in which iloprost (20 μg) and saline were inhaled, 
respectively. The PaO2/FIO2 ratio, dead space, dynamic compliance, and tissue 
Doppler imaging with myocardial performance index (MPI) were assessed 30 minutes 
after initiating OLV (pre-Tx) and 30 minutes after completion of drug inhalation 
(post-Tx). Repeated variables were analyzed using a linear mixed-model between 
the groups.
RESULTS: At pre-Tx, no differences were observed in measured parameters between 
the groups. At post-Tx, PaO2/FIO2 ratio (P < .001) and dynamic compliance (P = 
.023) were significantly higher and dead space ventilation was significantly 
lower (P = .001) in iloprost group (ILO group) compared to Control group. Left 
(P = .003) and right ventricular MPIs (P < .001) significantly decreased in ILO 
group compared to Control group.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled iloprost improved pulmonary oxygenation, lung mechanics, 
and cardiac function simultaneously during OLV in COPD patients with poor lung 
oxygenation.

DOI: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000004733
PMID: 32167976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Clin Lab Anal. 2020 Apr 27:e23346. doi: 10.1002/jcla.23346. Online ahead of 
print.

Long non-coding RNA PVT1, a novel biomarker for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease progression surveillance and acute exacerbation prediction potentially 
through interaction with microRNA-146a.

Wang Y(1)(2), Lyu X(3), Wu X(2), Yu L(2), Hu K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Disease, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
China.
(2)Department of Critical Care Medicine, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the abilities of long non-coding RNA 
PVT1 (lnc-PVT1) and microRNA-146a (miR-146a) in predicting chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) susceptibility and acute exacerbation risk, moreover, 
to explore the association of lnc-PVT1 with disease severity, inflammation, and 
miR-146a in patients with COPD.
METHODS: A total of 80 acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) patients, 80 stable 
COPD patients, and 80 healthy controls (HCs) were consecutively recruited. 
Peripheral blood samples of all participants were collected to isolate 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and serum: PBMCs were used to detect 
lnc-PVT1 and miR-146a by RT-qPCR; serum was used to detect inflammatory 
cytokines by ELISA. Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) stage of COPD was assessed.
RESULTS: Lnc-PVT1 expression was highest in AECOPD patients, followed by stable 
COPD patients and HCs. Receiver operating characteristic curves disclosed that 
lnc-PVT1 distinguished AECOPD patients and stable COPD patients from HCs, also 
distinguished AECOPD patients from stable COPD patients. In AECOPD patients and 
stable COPD patients, lnc-PVT1 expression positively correlated with GOLD stage 
and levels of TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-17. Moreover, lnc-PVT1 was negatively 
correlated with miR-146a. For miR-146a, its expression was lowest in AECOPD 
patients, followed by stable COPD patients and HCs, and it predicted reduced 
COPD susceptibility and decreased acute exacerbation risk; meanwhile, it 
negatively correlated with GOLD stage and inflammatory cytokine levels in AECOPD 
patients and stable COPD patients.
CONCLUSION: Lnc-PVT1 assists the disease management and acute exacerbation risk 
monitoring of COPD via interaction with miR-146a.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Laboratory Analysis Published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.23346
PMID: 32342557


468. Ann Intern Med. 2020 Jun 2;172(11):735-742. doi: 10.7326/M20-1058.

Should You Recommend Inhaled Corticosteroids for This Patient With Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease?: Grand Rounds Discussion From Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center.

Burns RB(1), Anandaiah A(1), Rice MB(1), Smetana GW(1).

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts (R.B.B., A.A., 
M.B.R., G.W.S.).

Approximately 12 million adults in the United States receive a diagnosis of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) each year, and it is the fourth 
leading cause of death. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease refers to a group 
of diseases that cause airflow obstruction and a constellation of symptoms, 
including cough, sputum production, and shortness of breath. The main risk 
factor for COPD is tobacco smoke, but other environmental exposures also may 
contribute. The GOLD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease) 
2020 Report aims to provide a nonbiased review of the current evidence for the 
assessment, diagnosis, and treatment of patients with COPD. To date, no 
conclusive evidence exists that any existing medications for COPD modify 
mortality. The mainstay of treatment for COPD is inhaled bronchodilators, 
whereas the role of inhaled corticosteroids is less clear. Inhaled 
corticosteroids have substantial risks, including an increased risk for 
pneumonia. Here, 2 experts, both pulmonologists, reflect on the care of a woman 
with severe COPD, a 50-pack-year smoking history, frequent COPD exacerbations, 
and recurrent pneumonia. They consider the indications for inhaled 
corticosteroids in COPD, when inhaled corticosteroids should be withdrawn, and 
what other treatments are available.

DOI: 10.7326/M20-1058
PMID: 32479149


469. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2020 Feb 28;42(1):55-61. doi: 
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.11206.

[Values of Body Mass Index and Chest CT Features in the Assessment of Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Liu Y(2), Li J(1), Gao JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine,PUMC Hospital,CAMS and PUMC,Beijing 
100730,China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine,Civil Aviation General Hospital,Beijing 
100123,China.

Objective To investigate the clinical values of nutritional status and chest CT 
phenotypes in the assessment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD). 
Methods A total of 256 patients with stable COPD were enrolled from Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital and Civil Aviation General Hospital from June 2017 to 
June 2018.Demographic data,height,weight,smoking history,and number of 
exacerbations were collected.Pulmonary function tests and COPD assessment 
test(CAT)questionnaire-based survey were performed.The correlations of Goddard 
score with pulmonary function,CAT score,and number of exacerbations were 
analyzed.The clinical features of COPD patients with different body mass 
index(BMI)grades and CT phenotype were analyzed. Results The forced expiratory 
volume in one second as percentage of predicted value(FEV1%pred)was 
significantly higher in normal body mass group(t=-2.701,P=0.0080),overweight 
group(t=-3.506,P=0.001),and obese group(t=-4.323,P=0.000)than in low body mass 
group and was significantly higher in obese group than in normal body mass 
group(t=-3.096,P=0.002).The forced vital capacity as percentage of predicted 
value(FVC%pred)of normal body mass group(t=-3.081,P=0.002)and overweight 
group(t=-2.766,P=0.006)were significantly higher than that of low body mass 
group.The forced expiratory volume in one second(FEV1)/forced vital 
capacity(FVC)was significantly higher in overweight group than in normal body 
mass group(t=-3.702,P=0.001)and significantly higher in obese group than in low 
body mass group(t=-4.742,P=0.000),normal body mass group(t=-5.785,P=0.000),and 
overweight group(t=-2.984,P=0.003).In addition,the carbon monoxide diffusing 
capacity as percentage of predicted value(DLco%pred)was significantly higher in 
overweight group than in underweight(t=-3.042,P=0.003)and normal body mass 
groups(t=-3.128,P=0.002)and significantly higher in obese group than in 
underweight group(t=-4.742,P=0.000)and normal body mass 
group(t=-5.785,P=0.000).The Goddard scores of overweight(Z=4.535,P=0.000)and 
obese groups(Z=5.422,P=0.000)were significantly lower than that of normal body 
mass group.Partial correlation analysis showed that Goddard score was negatively 
correlated with FEV1/FVC(r =-0.230,P = 0.022)and DLco%pred(r =-0.531,P = 
0.000)and positively correlated with CAT score(r = 0.244,P = 0.021).BMI of 
phenotype E(t=3.467,P=0.001)and M(t=3.031,P=0.003),FEV1/FVC of phenotype 
E(t=2.484,P=0.015)and M(t=2.969,P=0.004)as well as DLco%pred of phenotype 
E(t=4.928,P=0.000)and M(t=2.489,P=0.0163)were significantly lower than those of 
phenotype A.Patients with phenotype M had worse FEV1%pred,FVC%pred,residual 
volume/total lung capacity and number of acute exacerbations than patients with 
phenotypes A and E,but the differences were not statistically significant(all P 
>0.05). Conclusions The nutritional status is closely related to lung 
function,severity of emphysema,and number of exacerbations in COPD 
patients.Chest CT phenotype is clinically valuable in the assessment of COPD.

DOI: 10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.11206
PMID: 32131940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Cardiol. 2020 Mar 16:S0914-5087(20)30065-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2020.02.009. 
Online ahead of print.

Echocardiographic predictors of stress induced right ventricular diastolic 
dysfunction in non-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Cherneva ZV(1), Denchev SV(2), Cherneva RV(3).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Sofia, Bulgaria. 
Electronic address: jenicherneva@yahoo.com.
(2)University Hospital of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)University Hospital for Respiratory Diseases "St. Sophia'', Sofia, Bulgaria.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary vasculopathy, right heart structural and functional 
abnormalities occur even in normoxemic chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) patients. Despite being associated with functional limitation, 
exacerbations, and disease progression, their detection and proper management is 
still delayed.
AIM: Our aim was to establish the frequency of stress-induced right ventricular 
diastolic dysfunction (RVDD) in non-severe COPD patients, free of overt 
cardiovascular disease, who complain of exertional dyspnea and to look for 
echocardiographic predictors of it.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We applied cardio-pulmonary exercise testing (CPET) in 
104 non-severe, COPD patients. A ramp protocol was performed. Echocardiography 
was done before and 1-2 min after peak exercise. Cut-off values for stress 
induced RVDD were E/e' >6. Receiver operating curves were constructed for echo 
parameters at rest to determine if any of them may discriminate stress induced 
RV E/e'>6 or <6. Uni- and multivariable linear regression analysis was also 
performed to assess the predictive power of each of them. A p-value < 0.05 was 
considered significant.
RESULTS: A total of 78% of the patients had stress-induced RVDD. Right atrium 
volume index (RAVI) (cut-off >20.55 ml/m2; sensitivity - 86%; specificity - 
86%), RV wall thickness (RVWT) (cut-off >5.25 mm; sensitivity - 100%; 
specificity - 63%), and RV E/A ratio at rest (cut-off >1.05; sensitivity - 
79.7%; specificity - 90.5%) were the best predictors of stress RV E/e. In 
univariate regression analysis E/A showed the highest OR 19.73 (95% CI - 
18.52-21.01); followed by RAVI - OR 3.82; (95% CI - 2.04-7.14).
CONCLUSION: There is a high prevalence of stress-induced RVDD in non-severe COPD 
patients with exertional dyspnea, free of overt cardiovascular disease. RAVI, 
RVWT, E/A, and E/e' ratio at rest may be used as predictors for stress RVDD and 
may facilitate patients' risk stratification and proper management.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2020.02.009
PMID: 32192845


471. AAPS J. 2019 Apr 26;21(4):60. doi: 10.1208/s12248-019-0319-9.

A Novel Method for Analysing Frequent Observations from Questionnaires in Order 
to Model Patient-Reported Outcomes: Application to EXACT® Daily Diary Data from 
COPD Patients.

Germovsek E(1), Ambery C(2), Yang S(2), Beerahee M(2), Karlsson MO(1), Plan 
EL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University, Box 591, SE-751 
24, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Clinical Pharmacology Modelling and Simulation, GlaxoSmithKline, London, UK.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University, Box 591, SE-751 
24, Uppsala, Sweden. elodie.plan@farmbio.uu.se.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive lung disease with 
approximately 174 million cases worldwide. Electronic questionnaires are 
increasingly used for collecting patient-reported-outcome (PRO) data about 
disease symptoms. Our aim was to leverage PRO data, collected to record COPD 
disease symptoms, in a general modelling framework to enable interpretation of 
PRO observations in relation to disease progression and potential to predict 
exacerbations. The data were collected daily over a year, in a prospective, 
observational study. The e-questionnaire, the EXAcerbations of COPD Tool 
(EXACT®) included 14 items (i.e. questions) with 4 or 5 ordered categorical 
response options. An item response theory (IRT) model was used to relate the 
responses from each item to the underlying latent variable (which we refer to as 
disease severity), and on each item level, Markov models (MM) with 4 or 5 
categories were applied to describe the dependence between consecutive 
observations. Minimal continuous time MMs were used and parameterised using 
ordinary differential equations. One hundred twenty-seven COPD patients were 
included (median age 67 years, 54% male, 39% current smokers), providing 
approximately 40,000 observations per EXACT® item. The final model suggested 
that, with time, patients more often reported the same scores as the previous 
day, i.e. the scores were more stable. The modelled COPD disease severity change 
over time varied markedly between subjects, but was small in the typical 
individual. This is the first IRT model with Markovian properties; our analysis 
proved them necessary for predicting symptom-defined exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1208/s12248-019-0319-9
PMCID: PMC6486532
PMID: 31028495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EG, MOK and EP declare that they have no 
conflict of interest. CA, SY and MB are GSK employees and hold GSK shares.


472. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2020 Feb 6;90(1). doi: 10.4081/monaldi.2020.1126.

Iron deficiency in non-anemic chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in a 
predominantly male population: an ignored entity.

Rathi V(1), Ish P, Singh G, Tiwari M, Goel N, Gaur SN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Vardhman Mahavir 
Medical College and Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi. vidushirathi@gmail.com.

Non-anemic iron deficiency has been studied in heart failure, but studies are 
lacking in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The potential clinical 
implications of association of iron deficiency with the severity of COPD warrant 
research in this direction. This was an observational, cross-sectional study on 
patients with COPD to compare disease severity, functional status and quality of 
life in non-anemic patients with COPD between two groups - iron deficient and 
non-iron deficient. Stable non-anemic COPD with no cause of bleeding were 
evaluated for serum iron levels, ferritin levels, TIBC, 6MWD, SGRQ, spirometry, 
and CAT questionnaire. The study patients were divided into iron replete (IR) 
and iron deficient (ID) groups. A total of 79 patients were studied, out of 
which 72 were men and seven were women. The mean age was 61.5±8.42 years. Of 
these, 36 (45.5%; 95% CI, 34.3-56.8%) had iron deficiency. Mean 6-minute-walk 
distance was significantly shorter in ID (354.28±82.4 meters vs 432.5±47.21 
meters; p=0.001). A number of exacerbations in a year were more in ID group 
(p=0.003), and more patients in ID had at least two exacerbations of COPD within 
a year (p=0.001). However, the resting pO2, SaO2, and SpO2 levels did not differ 
significantly between the two groups (p=0.15 and p=0.52, respectively). Also, 
there was no significant difference in the distribution of patients of a 
different class of airflow limitations between the two groups. Non-anemic iron 
deficiency (NAID) is an ignored, yet easily correctable comorbidity in COPD. 
Patients with iron deficiency have a more severe grade of COPD, had lesser 
exercise capacity and more exacerbations in a year as compared to non-iron 
deficient patients. So, foraying into the avenue of iron supplementation, which 
has shown promising results in improving functional capacity in heart failure 
and pulmonary hypertension, may well lead to revolutionary changes in the 
treatment of COPD.

DOI: 10.4081/monaldi.2020.1126
PMID: 32072798


473. J Assoc Physicians India. 2019 Apr;67(4):14-16.

Power of BODE Index in Predicting Future Exacerbations of COPD: A Prospective 
Observational Study in Indian Population.

Praveen CK(1), Manu M(2), Mohapatra AK(3), Pentapati KC(4).

Author information:
(1)Junior Resident (Former), Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kasturba 
Medical College, Manipal, Karnataka.
(2)Associate Professor, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kasturba Medical 
College, Manipal, Karnataka, *Corresponding Author.
(3)Professor, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kasturba Medical College, 
Manipal, Karnataka.
(4)Associate Professor, Department of Public Health Dentistry, Manipal College 
of Dental Sciences, Manipal; Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, 
Udupi, Karnataka.

BACKGROUND: BODE index is a multidimensional measure of survival in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is composed of body mass index (B), the 
degree of airflow obstruction (O), dyspnoea (D), and exercise capacity (E). 
Studies have shown that BODE index can predict future exacerbations, but similar 
data in Indian population is unavailable. This study was aimed at evaluating the 
power of BODE index to predict the frequency of exacerbations of COPD in Indian 
cohort.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective observational cohort study that included 
stable COPD subjects aged above 40 years. We assessed the BODE index at baseline 
and recorded the number of exacerbations at the end of 12 months. Spearman's Rho 
and Poisson regression model were used to correlate the BODE index with the 
frequency of exacerbations.
RESULTS: We analysed 78 COPD patients. A significant correlation was seen 
between BODE index at baseline and number of exacerbations at 12 months 
(Spearman's Rho 0.738). A unit change in BODE index at baseline would have 1.25 
times higher number of exacerbations at 12 months (95% CI: 1.17-1.33).
CONCLUSIONS: BODE index has significant power to predict the frequency of future 
exacerbations in Indian COPD patients.

© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2011.

PMID: 31311211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Apr;99(16):e19789. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000019789.

A comparison of tiotropium/olodaterol vs tiotropium alone in terms of treatment 
effect for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A meta-analysis.

He J(1), Lin JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, China-Japan Friendship 
Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Combinations of long-acting bronchodilators with different 
mechanisms of action are recommended to improve prognosis and reduce risk of 
adverse events of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is unclear 
whether the new combination therapy with long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA) tiotropium (TIO) and long acting beta-agonists (LABA) olodaterol (OLO) 
was superior to tiotropium alone.
METHODS: We measured the efficacy of the TIO/OLO combination vsTIO alone for 
COPD patients based on electronic databases up to February 2019. After rigorous 
quality review, data was extracted from eligible trials. All the main outcomes 
were pooled analysis using RevMan software.
RESULTS: A total of 6 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were identified. The 
pooled results of our meta-analysis demonstrated that FEV1 [MD = 0.03, 95% CI 
(-0.01,0.07), P = .18], FVC [MD = -0.03, 95%CI (-0.06,0.00), P = .09] and 
FEV1%pred [MD = 0.35, 95%CI (-0.30, 0.99), P = .29] all showed no significant 
difference between the 2 groups. The overall incidence of adverse effects (AEs) 
[OR = 1.01,95%CI (0.93,1.09), P = .87] and serious AEs [OR = 1.04,95% CI (0.82, 
1.32), P = .72] in the combination group was similar to that of the TIO alone 
group, without statistical significance.
CONCLUSION: These studies reported that the TIO/OLO combination did not show 
superior effects than tiotropium alone for COPD. Additionally, both therapies 
were well tolerated.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000019789
PMID: 32311990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2020 May 8. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.202001-070OC. Online ahead 
of print.

Predicting Severe COPD Exacerbations: Developing a Population Surveillance 
Approach with Administrative Data.

Tavakoli H(1), Chen W(2), Sin DD(3), FitzGerald JM(2), Sadatsafavi M(4); 
Canadian Respiratory Research Network.

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia, Institute for Heart and Lung Health, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Institute of Heart and Lung Health, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)University of Alberta, Medicine, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)University of British Columbia, Institute for Heart and Lung Health, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; mohsen.sadatsafavi@ubc.ca.

RATIONALE: Automatic prediction algorithms based on routinely collected health 
data may be able to identify patients at high-risk for hospitalizations related 
to acute exacerbations of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD).
OBJECTIVE: This was a proof-of-concept study for a population surveillance 
approach towards identifying individuals at high risk of severe COPD 
exacerbations.
METHODS: We used British Columbia's administrative health databases (1997-2016) 
to identify patients with diagnosed COPD. We used data from the previous six 
months to predict the risk of severe exacerbation in the next two months after a 
randomly selected index date. We applied statistical and machine learning 
algorithms for risk prediction (logistic regression, random forest, neural 
network, and gradient boosting). We used calibration plots and receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) curves to evaluate model performance based on a 
randomly chosen future date at least one year later (temporal validation).
RESULTS: There were 108,433 patients in the development and 113,786 in the 
validation datasets; of these, 1,126 and 1,136, respectively, were hospitalized 
due to COPD within their outcome windows. The best prediction algorithm 
(gradient boosting) had an area under the ROC curve of 0.82 (95%CI 0.80-0.83), 
significantly higher than the corresponding value for the model with 
exacerbation history as the only predictor (current standard of care - 0.68). 
The predicted risk scores were well calibrated in the validation dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: Imminent COPD-related hospitalizations can be predicted with good 
accuracy using administrative health data. This model may be used as a means to 
target high-risk patients for preventive exacerbation therapies.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.202001-070OC
PMID: 32383971


476. Semergen. 2020 Jan-Feb;46(1):53-59. doi: 10.1016/j.semerg.2019.08.002. Epub 2019 
Aug 31.

[Comorbidity in mental health in patients diagnosed with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Montserrat-Capdevila J(1), Godoy P(2), Marsal JR(3), Ortega M(4), Pifarré J(5), 
Barbé F(6).

Author information:
(1)Atención Primaria, Institut Català de la Salut, Lleida, Cataluña, España; 
Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida (IRBLleida), Lleida, Cataluña, España; 
Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de Lleida, Lleida, Cataluña, España. 
Electronic address: jmontser@alumni.unav.es.
(2)Agència de Salut Pública de Catalunya, Departament de Salut, Lleida, 
Cataluña, España; Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida (IRBLleida), Lleida, 
Cataluña, España; Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de Lleida, Lleida, Cataluña, 
España; CIBER de epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid, España.
(3)Unitat d'Epidemiologia del Servei de Cardiologia, Hospital Universitari Vall 
d'Hebron, Barcelona, Cataluña, España.
(4)Unitat de Suport a la Recerca Lleida, Institut Universitari d'Investigació en 
Atenció Primària (IDIAP) Jordi Gol, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Lleida, 
Cataluña, España; Atención Primaria, Institut Català de la Salut, Lleida, 
Cataluña, España.
(5)Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida (IRBLleida), Lleida, Cataluña, 
España; Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de Lleida, Lleida, Cataluña; Servei de 
Psiquiatria, Hospital Universitari Santa Maria, Lleida, Cataluña, España.
(6)Grupo de Patología Respiratoria, Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida 
(IRBLleida), Lleida, Cataluña, España; Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de 
Lleida, Lleida, Cataluña, España; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Madrid, España.

OBJECTIVE: Anxiety and depression play an important role in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, although there are a limited number of studies that have 
attempted to determine their relationship with exacerbations, and even less have 
tried to quantify the number of associated exacerbations. The aim of this study 
was to determine the risk of exacerbations associated with anxiety and 
depression in patients diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A prospective cohort study was conducted that analysed the 
factors associated with exacerbations in 512 patients over a 2-year period. The 
exacerbations that required antibiotics and/or systemic corticosteroids were 
defined as moderate, and those that required hospital admission, as severe. The 
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale was applied to each patient, and the 
number of exacerbations during follow-up were quantified.
RESULTS: The prevalence of anxiety/depression at the beginning of the study was 
15.6%. During the 2 years of follow-up, the mean number of exacerbations was 
2.21. The patients that also had anxiety/depression at the beginning of the 
study had a higher mean number of exacerbations (2.8; P=.001). 
Anxiety/depression was associated with an increased number of moderate-severe 
exacerbations in the adjusted analysis (IRRa=1.48). The other risk factors 
associated with a higher mean number of exacerbations were, a history of a 
previous severe exacerbation (IRRa=1.50; obesity (IRRa=1.27); overweight 
(IRRa=1.23); FEV1 ≤ 77% (IRRa=0.84); and more dyspnoea (IRRa=1.14).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with anxiety/depression have a greater number of 
exacerbations, and have a 48% higher risk of suffering an exacerbation compared 
to those with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with no anxiety/depression.

Copyright © 2019 Sociedad Española de Médicos de Atención Primaria (SEMERGEN). 
Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semerg.2019.08.002
PMID: 31481312


477. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2020 Jun;21(9):997-1004. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2020.1745185. Epub 2020 Apr 1.

Evaluating revefenacin as a therapeutic option for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Antoniu SA(1), Rajnoveanu R(2), Ulmeanu R(3), Mihaltan F(4), Grigore M(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Grigore T Popa , 
Iasi, Romania.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu Hatieganu , 
Cluj Napoca, Romania.
(3)Faculty of Medicine , Oradea, Romania.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila 
Bucuresti , Bucuresti, Romania.
(5)University of Medicine and Pharmacy Grigore T Popa , Iasi, Romania.

INTRODUCTION: In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), inhaled 
long-acting antimuscarinic agents (LAMA) are effective maintenance therapies 
used across all severity stages of the disease. Most of them are administered 
via dry powder inhalers, but these devices require a potent inspiratory flow 
which cannot be effectively achieved by patients with advanced disease. In such 
patients, inhaled therapy via nebulization might be an option.
AREAS COVERED: Revefenacin is a LAMA that was specifically formulated for once 
daily nebulization and which was authorized by the FDA as a maintenance therapy 
for COPD. In phase II and III clinical studies discussed in this review, 
revefenacin demonstrated its rapid onset of action and sustained effect on lung 
function on both a short- and long-term basis.
EXPERT OPINION: Nebulized revefenacin with once daily use does not require any 
particular effort of administration and hence can be used by patients with 
severe airways obstruction or by those having milder cognitive deficits. Further 
studies are needed, however, to better document the long-term cardiovascular 
safety and its ability to reduce the exacerbation rate.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2020.1745185
PMID: 32237914


478. Eur J Emerg Med. 2019 Feb;26(1):53-58. doi: 10.1097/MEJ.0000000000000492.

Improving compliance with a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease bundle of care 
in Australian emergency departments: a clinical network quality improvement 
project.

Kelly AM(1)(2)(3), Pannifex J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Human Services, Emergency Care Clinical Network, 
Safer Care Victoria, Melbourne.
(2)Joseph Epstein Centre for Emergency Medicine Research, St Albans.
(3)School of Medicine - Western Clinical School, the University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to describe the impact of a clinical 
network-led quality improvement project on compliance with bundle of care 
elements (individually and as a 'bundle') for patients treated for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations in the emergency department.
PARTICIPANTS AND METHODS: A 9-month quality improvement project was performed by 
a modified knowledge transfer methodology with analysis by before and after data 
collection. The primary outcomes of interest were compliance with key bundle of 
care elements (individually and as a 'bundle'). The analysis is descriptive.
RESULTS: Seven emergency departments participated in the project. A total of 179 
patients were included in the predata and 203 in the postdata. Administration of 
controlled oxygen therapy (if oxygen given) increased from 74 to 80% 
(P=nonsignificant). Administration of inhaled bronchodilators increased from 80 
to 91% (P=0.004). Administration of systemic corticosteroids increased from 76 
to 88% (P=0.003). Administration of antibiotics (if evidence of infection) 
increased from 85 to 99% (P<0.001). Analysis of a blood gas in nonmild disease 
increased from 82 to 91% (P=0.04) and administration of noninvasive ventilation 
if pH less than 7.3 increased from 53 to 81% (P=0.01). Compliance with all 
appropriate elements of the defined bundle of care increased from 43 to 63% 
(P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: A locally managed, clinical network-supported quality improvement 
project resulted in significant improvements in compliance with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease bundle of care elements.

DOI: 10.1097/MEJ.0000000000000492
PMID: 28777122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jun 5;17(11):4027. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph17114027.

Prevalence of Seasonal Influenza Vaccination in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease (COPD) Patients in the Balearic Islands (Spain) and Its Effect on COPD 
Exacerbations: A Population-Based Retrospective Cohort Study.

Ruiz Azcona L(1), Roman-Rodriguez M(2)(3), Llort Bove M(3), van Boven JF(4), 
Santibáñez Margüello M(1).

Author information:
(1)Global Health research group, University of Cantabria, 39005 Santander, 
Spain.
(2)Primary Care Respiratory Research Group, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
de las Islas Baleares (IdISBa), 07011 Palma, Spain.
(3)Balearic Primary Health Care Service (IBSalut), 07011 Palma, Spain.
(4)Department of General Practice & Elderly Care Medicine, Groningen Research 
Institute for Asthma and COPD (GRIAC), University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands.

To determine the prevalence of influenza vaccination in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) patients and its effect on COPD exacerbations, we 
conducted a retrospective population-based cohort study analyzing real-life 
data. We included all registered COPD patients ≥40 years old using respiratory 
medication during the study period (2012-2013). Influenza vaccination during the 
2012/2013 campaign was the parameter studied. Moderate and severe exacerbations 
during 2013 were the dependent outcome variables. Logistic regression adjusting 
for age, gender, concomitant asthma diagnosis, COPD severity, smoking status, 
number of moderate and severe exacerbations the previous year, and comorbidities 
was performed, and 59.6% of the patients received seasonal influenza 
vaccination. The percentage of patients with exacerbations was higher among 
those vaccinated. Influenza vaccination had a statistically significantly 
negative (non-protective) crude effect favoring the risk of severe 
exacerbations: OR: 1.20 (95% CI; 1.05-1.37). This association diminished and 
lost statistical significance after adjustment: aOR: 0.93 (95% CI; 0.74-1.18). 
The protective effect in the analysis restricted to the epidemic period was not 
significant: aOR: 0.82 (95% CI; 0.58-1.16). We concluded that prevalence of 
influenza vaccination was suboptimal. In contrast with most of the available 
evidence, our results did not support a protective effect of influenza 
vaccination on the risk of admission for COPD exacerbation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17114027
PMCID: PMC7312905
PMID: 32517007

Conflict of interest statement: Monserrat LLort Bove declares that she received 
payments for lectures for Pfizer and Rovi. Job van Boven’s research institute 
received research grants from Astra Zeneca, Chiesi and Boehringer Ingelheim, 
consultancy fees from AstraZeneca and Chiesi, and speaking fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim and Menarini. Miguel Román Rodríguez declares that he received 
payments for lectures for Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, 
Mundipharma, Menarini, TEVA, and Zambon, fees for participation in steering 
committees for research projects for Astra Zeneca and GSK, and his research 
institute received research grants from Astra Zeneca, GSK and Mundipharma. Laura 
Ruiz-Azcona and Miguel Santibáñez Margüello declare no conflicts of interest 
outside the present manuscript. The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests for this specific project other than the institutional funding 
received.


480. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2020 May 27:1-16. doi: 
10.1080/13543784.2020.1769064. Online ahead of print.

Investigational treatments in phase I and II clinical trials: a systematic 
review in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Calzetta L(1), Ritondo BL(1), Matera MG(2), Pezzuto G(3), Cazzola M(1), Rogliani 
P(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata" , Rome, Italy.
(2)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania Luigi Vanvitelli , Naples, Italy.
(3)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital "Tor Vergata" , Rome, 
Italy.

INTRODUCTION: . The current pharmacological treatments for the management of 
stable COPD permit the reduction of symptoms and frequency and severity of 
exacerbations, and the improvement of exercise tolerance and health status. 
However, they do not modify the long-term decline in lung function and patient 
health. Consequently, there is the strong need for 'highly innovative' 
medications that are focused on new targets and/or mechanisms for the treatment 
of COPD.
AREAS COVERED: . This systematic review assesses investigational agents in Phase 
I and II clinical trials over the last six years. It offers insights on whether 
drugs and/or formulations in clinical development offer future effective 
treatments of COPD.
EXPERT OPINION: . There is no evidence to suggest that current investigational 
agents can reduce lung function decline and cure COPD. However, looking forward, 
investigational, innovative treatments in combination with the therapies already 
recommended by the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
may provide future suitable tools to counteract the progression of COPD.

DOI: 10.1080/13543784.2020.1769064
PMID: 32401655


481. Ann Intern Med. 2020 Mar 17;172(6):413-422. doi: 10.7326/M19-3007. Epub 2020 Feb 
25.

Pharmacologic Therapies in Patients With Exacerbation of Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease: A Systematic Review With Meta-analysis.

Dobler CC(1), Morrow AS(2), Beuschel B(2), Farah MH(2), Majzoub AM(2), Wilson 
ME(2), Hasan B(2), Seisa MO(2), Daraz L(2), Prokop LJ(3), Murad MH(2), Wang 
Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Evidence-Based Practice Center, Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for the 
Science of Health Care Delivery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, and 
Institute for Evidence-Based Healthcare, Bond University and Gold Coast 
University Hospital, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia (C.C.D.).
(2)Evidence-Based Practice Center, Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for the 
Science of Health Care Delivery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota (A.S.M., 
B.B., M.H.F., A.M.M., M.E.W., B.H., M.O.S., L.D., M.H.M., Z.W.).
(3)Library Public Services, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota (L.J.P.).

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by 
frequent exacerbations.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the comparative effectiveness and adverse events (AEs) of 
pharmacologic interventions for adults with exacerbation of COPD.
DATA SOURCES: English-language searches of several bibliographic sources from 
database inception to 2 January 2019.
STUDY SELECTION: 68 randomized controlled trials that enrolled adults with 
exacerbation of COPD treated in out- or inpatient settings other than intensive 
care and compared pharmacologic therapies with placebo, "usual care," or other 
pharmacologic interventions.
DATA EXTRACTION: Two reviewers independently extracted data and rated study 
quality and strength of evidence (SOE).
DATA SYNTHESIS: Compared with placebo or management without antibiotics, 
antibiotics given for 3 to 14 days were associated with increased exacerbation 
resolution at the end of the intervention (odds ratio [OR], 2.03 [95% CI, 1.47 
to 2.80]; moderate SOE) and less treatment failure at the end of the 
intervention (OR, 0.54 [CI, 0.34 to 0.86]; moderate SOE), independent of 
severity of exacerbations in out- and inpatients. Compared with placebo in out- 
and inpatients, systemic corticosteroids given for 9 to 56 days were associated 
with less treatment failure at the end of the intervention (OR, 0.01 [CI, 0.00 
to 0.13]; low SOE) but also with a higher number of total and endocrine-related 
AEs. Compared with placebo or usual care in inpatients, other pharmacologic 
interventions (aminophyllines, magnesium sulfate, anti-inflammatory agents, 
inhaled corticosteroids, and short-acting bronchodilators) had insufficient 
evidence, showing either no or inconclusive effects (with the exception of the 
mucolytic erdosteine) or improvement only in lung function.
LIMITATION: Scant evidence for many interventions; several studies had unclear 
or high risk of bias and inadequate reporting of AEs.
CONCLUSION: Antibiotics and systemic corticosteroids reduce treatment failure in 
adults with mild to severe exacerbation of COPD.
PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (PROSPERO: 
CRD42018111609).

DOI: 10.7326/M19-3007
PMID: 32092762


482. Qual Life Res. 2020 Mar;29(3):607-617. doi: 10.1007/s11136-019-02340-4. Epub 
2019 Oct 31.

Correlation between disease severity factors and EQ-5D utilities in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Esquinas C(1)(2), Ramon MA(3)(4)(5), Nuñez A(3), Molina J(6), Quintano JA(7), 
Roman-Rodríguez M(8), Naberan K(9), Llor C(10), Roncero C(11), Miravitlles 
M(3)(5), Barrecheguren M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pneumology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Passeig Vall 
d'Hebron 119-129, 08035, Barcelona, Spain. crise4@hotmail.com.
(2)Public Health, Mental, Maternal and Child Health Nursing Departament, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 
crise4@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Pneumology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Passeig Vall 
d'Hebron 119-129, 08035, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Departament de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Madrid, Spain.
(6)Dirección Asistencial Oeste, Centro de Salud Francia, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Centro de Salud Lucena, Córdoba, Spain.
(8)Primary Health Care Center Son Pisà, IB-Salut, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(9)Centro de Salud Fuentes de Ebro, Saragossa, Spain.
(10)Primary Care Centre Via Roma, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Psychiatric Service, University of Salamanca Health Care Complex, Institute 
of Biomedicine of Salamanca, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.

PURPOSE: Impaired health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is associated with poor 
health outcomes in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The aim of this 
study was to determine health utilities in patients with COPD and to identify 
the variables with the greatest impact.
METHODS: This is a pooled analysis of data from 4 observational studies 
performed in stable COPD patients. Evaluation of patient HRQoL utilities was 
performed using the Spanish version of the self-administered EuroQoL 5 
Dimensions (EQ-5D) questionnaire. EQ-5D utilities were described and compared 
according to several markers of disease severity.
RESULTS: 6198 patients reported a mean (SD) EQ-5D index of 0.67 (0.26). A linear 
dose response relationship between EQ-5D utility and modified Medical Research 
Council (mMRC) score, forced expiratory volume in one 1 s (% predicted), COPD 
hospital admissions in the previous year, self-reported daily walking time, 
Charlson index, body mass index, obstruction, dyspnoea and exacerbation (BODEx) 
index, COPD assessment test (CAT), hospital anxiety and depression scale was 
observed (p for trend < 0.001). In multivariate analysis, patients reporting 
lower utility values were those with more dyspnoea, more comorbidities, using 
long-term oxygen therapy, with previous hospitalisations due to a COPD 
exacerbation and higher (worse) CAT score.
CONCLUSION: HRQoL measures such as EQ-5D can assist clinicians to understand the 
impact of respiratory disease on COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-019-02340-4
PMID: 31673922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Clin Lab Anal. 2020 Jun 25:e23410. doi: 10.1002/jcla.23410. Online ahead of 
print.

The clinical value of lncRNA MALAT1 and its targets miR-125b, miR-133, miR-146a, 
and miR-203 for predicting disease progression in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease patients.

Liu S(1), Liu M(2), Dong L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of 
Jianghan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tianjin Medical 
University General Hospital, Tianjin, China.

OBJECTIVE: The study aimed to explore the correlations of long non-coding RNA 
MALAT1 (lncRNA MALAT1) and its targets microRNA (miR)-125b, miR-133, miR-146a, 
and miR-203 with acute exacerbation risk, inflammation, and disease severity of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Plasma samples were obtained from 120 acute exacerbation COPD (AECOPD) 
patients, 120 stable COPD patients, and 120 healthy controls (HCs). RT-qPCR was 
conducted to detect lncRNA MALAT1 expression and its target miRNAs, and ELISA 
was performed to detect the inflammatory cytokines.
RESULTS: LncRNA MALAT1 was highest in AECOPD patients followed by stable COPD 
patients and then HCs, which distinguished AECOPD patients from HCs (AUC: 0.969, 
95% CI: 0.951-0.987) and stable COPD patients (AUC: 0.846, 95% CI: 0.798-0.894). 
Furthermore, lncRNA MALAT1 positively correlated with GOLD stage in both AECOPD 
and stable COPD patients. Regarding inflammatory cytokines, lncRNA MALAT1 
positively correlated with tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin (IL)-1β, 
IL-6, IL-8, IL-17, and IL-23 in both AECOPD and stable COPD patients. Besides, 
lncRNA MALAT1 negatively correlated with miR-125b, miR-146a, and miR-203 in 
AECOPD patients and reversely correlated with miR-125b and miR-146a in stable 
COPD patients. Notably, miR-125b, miR-133, miR-146a, and miR-203 were the lowest 
in AECOPD patients, followed by stable COPD patients, and then HCs; miR-125b, 
miR-133, miR-146a, and miR-203 negatively correlated with inflammation and GOLD 
stage in AECOPD and stable COPD patients.
CONCLUSION: LncRNA MALAT1 exhibits clinical implications in acute exacerbation 
risk prediction and management of COPD via the inner-correlation with its 
targets miR-125b, miR-146a, and miR-203.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Laboratory Analysis Published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.23410
PMID: 32583510


484. Patient Educ Couns. 2020 Jun 18:S0738-3991(20)30333-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.pec.2020.06.015. Online ahead of print.

Predictors of patient adherence to COPD self-management exacerbation action 
plans.

Schrijver J(1), Effing TW(2), Brusse-Keizer M(3), van der Palen J(4), van der 
Valk P(5), Lenferink A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, the 
Netherlands. Electronic address: J.Schrijver@mst.nl.
(2)College of Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine, Flinders 
University, Adelaide, Australia; Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, 
Southern Adelaide Local Health Network, Adelaide, Australia.
(3)Medical School Twente, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands.
(4)Medical School Twente, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands; 
Department of Research Methodology, Measurement, and Data-Analysis, Faculty of 
Behavioural, Management and Social Sciences, University of Twente, Enschede, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, the 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, the 
Netherlands; Department of Health Technology and Services Research, Faculty of 
Behavioural, Management and Social Sciences, Technical Medical Centre, 
University of Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Identifying patient characteristics predicting categories of patient 
adherence to Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) exacerbation action 
plans.
METHODS: Data were obtained from self-treatment intervention groups of two COPD 
self-management trials. Patients with ≥1 exacerbation and/or ≥1 self-initiated 
prednisolone course during one-year follow-up were included. Optimal treatment 
was defined as 'self-initiating prednisolone treatment ≤2 days from the onset of 
a COPD exacerbation'. Predictors of adherence categories were identified by 
multinomial logistic regression analysis using patient characteristics.
RESULTS: 145 COPD patients were included and allocated to four adherence 
categories: 'optimal treatment' (26.2 %), 'sub optimal treatment' (11.7 %), 
'significant delay or no treatment' (31.7 %), or 'treatment outside the actual 
exacerbation period' (30.3 %). One unit increase in baseline dyspnoea score 
(mMRC scale 0-4) increased the risk of 'significant delay or no treatment' (OR 
1.64 (95 % CI 1.07-2.50)). Cardiac comorbidity showed a borderline significant 
increased risk of 'treatment outside the actual exacerbation period' (OR 2.40 
(95 % CI 0.98-5.85)).
CONCLUSION: More severe dyspnoea and cardiac comorbidity may lower adherence to 
COPD exacerbation action plans.
PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: Tailored self-management support with more focus on 
dyspnoea and cardiac disease symptoms may help patients to better act upon 
increased exacerbation symptoms and improve adherence to COPD exacerbation 
action plans.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pec.2020.06.015
PMID: 32616320

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.


485. Chest. 2020 Mar 14:S0012-3692(20)30446-3. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2020.02.048. 
Online ahead of print.

Increased Chitotriosidase Is Associated With Aspergillus and Frequent 
Exacerbations in South-East Asian Patients With Bronchiectasis.

Poh TY(1), Tiew PY(2), Lim AYH(3), Thng KX(4), Binte Mohamed Ali NA(1), Narayana 
JK(1), Mac Aogáin M(1), Tien Z(4), Chew WM(5), Wai Chan AK(5), Keir HR(6), 
Dicker AJ(6), Hassan TM(7), Xu H(3), Tee AKH(8), Ong TH(5), Koh MS(9), 
Abisheganaden JA(3), Chalmers JD(6), Chotirmall SH(10).

Author information:
(1)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore.
(2)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore; Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Singapore 
General Hospital, Singapore.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, 
Singapore.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(5)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Singapore General 
Hospital, Singapore.
(6)Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of Dundee, Scotland.
(7)Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(8)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Changi General 
Hospital, Singapore.
(9)Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore; Department of Respiratory and Critical 
Care Medicine, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
(10)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore. Electronic address: schotirmall@ntu.edu.sg.

BACKGROUND: Chitinase activity is an important innate immune defence mechanism 
against infection that includes fungi. The 2 human chitinases: chitotriosidase 
(CHIT1) and acidic mammalian chitinase are associated to allergy, asthma, and 
COPD; however, their role in bronchiectasis and bronchiectasis-COPD overlap 
(BCO) is unknown.
RESEARCH QUESTION: What is the association between chitinase activity, airway 
fungi and clinical outcomes in bronchiectasis and bronchiectasis-COPD overlap?
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: A prospective cohort of 463 individuals were recruited 
across five hospital sites in three countries (Singapore, Malaysia, and 
Scotland) including individuals who were not diseased (n = 35) and who had 
severe asthma (n = 54), COPD (n = 90), bronchiectasis (n = 241) and BCO (n = 
43). Systemic chitinase levels were assessed for bronchiectasis and BCO and 
related to clinical outcomes, airway Aspergillus status, and underlying 
pulmonary mycobiome profiles.
RESULTS: Systemic chitinase activity is elevated significantly in bronchiectasis 
and BCO and exceed the activity in other airway diseases. CHIT1 activity 
strongly predicts bronchiectasis exacerbations and is associated with the 
presence of at least one Aspergillus species in the airway and frequent 
exacerbations (≥3 exacerbations/y). Subgroup analysis reveals an association 
between CHIT1 activity and the "frequent exacerbator" phenotype in South-East 
Asian patients whose airway mycobiome profiles indicate the presence of novel 
fungal taxa that include Macroventuria, Curvularia and Sarocladium. These taxa, 
enriched in frequently exacerbating South-East Asian patients with high CHIT1 
may have potential roles in bronchiectasis exacerbations.
INTERPRETATION: Systemic CHIT1 activity may represent a useful clinical tool for 
the identification of fungal-driven "frequent exacerbators" with bronchiectasis 
in South-East Asian populations.

Copyright © 2020 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2020.02.048
PMID: 32184111


486. COPD. 2020 Jun;17(3):253-260. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2020.1753669. Epub 2020 May 
3.

Clinical Outcomes and Inflammatory Responses of the Frequent Exacerbator in 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation: A Prospective Cohort Study.

Jenkins AR(1)(2), Holden NS(3), Gibbons LP(4), Jones AW(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of Nottingham, UK.
(2)Lincoln International Institute for Rural Health, University of Lincoln, 
Lincoln, UK.
(3)School of Life Sciences, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, UK.
(4)Countywide Community Respiratory Service, Lincolnshire Community Health 
Services NHS Trust, Lincoln, UK.

Frequent exacerbators of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a 
distinct clinical phenotype characterised by systemic inflammation. Study 
objectives were to determine clinical outcomes of pulmonary rehabilitation in 
frequent exacerbators and the impact this has on the key surrogate markers of 
this phenotype. Eighty-five mild-very severe COPD patients (FEV1 pred, 52 ± 18%) 
were categorised as frequent (≥2 exacerbations per year, n = 50) or infrequent 
exacerbators (≤1 exacerbation per year, n = 35). The primary outcomes were 
completion rates of pulmonary rehabilitation (clinical) and plasma fibrinogen 
(biological). Secondary outcomes were: incremental shuttle (ISWT) & endurance 
shuttle walk tests (ESWT), chronic respiratory disease questionnaire (CRQ), 
hospital anxiety and depression scale (HADS), plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), 
blood leukocyte counts, blood neutrophil activation (CD11b, CD62L, CD66b) and 
subsets (mature, immature, suppressive, progenitor). Fibrinogen and CRP 
concentrations were determined via ELISA's with neutrophil activation markers 
assessed using flow cytometry. Frequent exacerbators were less likely to 
complete pulmonary rehabilitation (44% vs 69%; p = 0.025). Both groups 
experienced improvements in ISWT (p < 0.001), ESWT (p < 0.001), all domains of 
the CRQ (p < 0.001) and Depression (p = 0.017). Pulmonary rehabilitation reduced 
resting concentrations of fibrinogen (frequent exacerbators = 12%, infrequent 
exacerbators = 4%, p = 0.033) and % of progenitor blood neutrophils (p = 0.015) 
in both groups, with reductions in total blood leukocyte (p = 0.018) and 
neutrophil counts (p = 0.018) also observed in frequent exacerbators. No 
significant reductions in CRP concentration (p = 0.937), neutrophil activation 
(CD11b, p = 0.553; CD62L, p = 0.070; CD66b, p = 0.317), or other neutrophil 
subsets (mature, p = 0.313; immature, p = 0.756; suppressive, p = 0.259) were 
observed. Frequent exacerbators of COPD were less likely to complete pulmonary 
rehabilitation, but those who complete experience similar benefits to infrequent 
exacerbators. Pulmonary rehabilitation may serve to have immune-modulatory 
properties for frequent exacerbators.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2020.1753669
PMID: 32362176


487. Front Pharmacol. 2020 Mar 12;11:259. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00259. eCollection 
2020.

Inhaled Phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) Inhibitors for Inflammatory Respiratory 
Diseases.

Phillips JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Inflammation Research, Amgen Research, Thousand Oaks, CA, 
United States.

PDE4 inhibitors can suppress a variety of inflammatory cell functions that 
contribute to their anti-inflammatory actions in respiratory diseases like 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma. The systemically 
delivered PDE4 inhibitor roflumilast has been approved for use in a subset of 
patients with severe COPD with chronic bronchitis and a history of 
exacerbations. Use of systemically delivered PDE4 inhibitors has been limited by 
systemic side effects. Inhaled PDE4 inhibitors have been considered as a viable 
alternative to increase tolerability and determine the maximum therapeutic 
potential of PDE4 inhibition in respiratory diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Phillips.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00259
PMCID: PMC7080983
PMID: 32226383


488. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2020 Mar 19;8(3):e15699. doi: 10.2196/15699.

Compliance and Utility of a Smartphone App for the Detection of Exacerbations in 
Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Cohort Study.

Rodriguez Hermosa JL(1)(2), Fuster Gomila A(3), Puente Maestu L(4), Amado Diago 
CA(5)(6), Callejas González FJ(7), Malo De Molina Ruiz R(8), Fuentes Ferrer 
ME(9)(10), Álvarez Sala-Walther JL(1)(2), Calle Rubio M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonology Department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Medical Department, School of Medicine, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Hospital Universitario Son Llátzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(4)Pulmonology Department, Hospital Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, 
Spain.
(5)Pulmonology Department, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla, 
Santander, Spain.
(6)Medical Department, School of Medicine, Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, 
Spain.
(7)Pulmonology Department, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, 
Albacete, Spain.
(8)Pulmonology Department, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro de 
Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.
(9)Departament of Preventive Medicine, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, 
Spain.
(10)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos, 
Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, mobile health (mHealth)-related apps have been 
developed to help manage chronic diseases. Apps may allow patients with a 
chronic disease characterized by exacerbations, such as chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), to track and even suspect disease exacerbations, 
thereby facilitating self-management and prompt intervention. Nevertheless, 
there is insufficient evidence regarding patient compliance in the daily use of 
mHealth apps for chronic disease monitoring.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to provide further evidence in support of 
prospectively recording daily symptoms as a useful strategy to detect COPD 
exacerbations through the smartphone app, Prevexair. It also aimed to analyze 
daily compliance and the frequency and characteristics of acute exacerbations of 
COPD recorded using Prevexair.
METHODS: This is a multicenter cohort study with prospective case recruitment 
including 116 patients with COPD who had a documented history of frequent 
exacerbations and were monitored over the course of 6 months. At recruitment, 
the Prevexair app was installed on their smartphones, and patients were 
instructed on how to use the app. The information recorded in the app included 
symptom changes, use of medication, and use of health care resources. The 
patients received messages on healthy lifestyle behaviors and a record of their 
cumulative symptoms in the app. There was no regular contact with the research 
team and no mentoring process. An exacerbation was considered reported if 
medical attention was sought and considered unreported if it was not reported to 
a health care professional.
RESULTS: Overall, compliance with daily records in the app was 66.6% (120/180), 
with a duration compliance of 78.8%, which was similar across disease severity, 
age, and comorbidity variables. However, patients who were active smokers, with 
greater dyspnea and a diagnosis of depression and obesity had lower compliance 
(P<.05). During the study, the patients experienced a total of 262 exacerbations 
according to daily records in the app, 99 (37.8%) of which were reported 
exacerbations and 163 (62.2%) were unreported exacerbations. None of the 
subject-related variables were found to be significantly associated with 
reporting. The duration of the event and number of symptoms present during the 
first day were strongly associated with reporting. Despite substantial 
variations in the COPD Assessment Test (CAT), there was improvement only among 
patients with no exacerbation and those with reported exacerbations. 
Nevertheless, CAT scores deteriorated among patients with unreported 
exacerbations.
CONCLUSIONS: The daily use of the Prevexair app is feasible and acceptable for 
patients with COPD who are motivated in their self-care because of frequent 
exacerbations of their disease. Monitoring through the Prevexair app showed 
great potential for the implementation of self-care plans and offered a better 
diagnosis of their chronic condition.

©Juan Luis Rodriguez Hermosa, Antonia Fuster Gomila, Luis Puente Maestu, Carlos 
Antonio Amado Diago, Francisco Javier Callejas González, Rosa Malo De Molina 
Ruiz, Manuel E Fuentes Ferrer, Jose Luis Álvarez Sala-Walther, Myriam Calle 
Rubio. Originally published in JMIR mHealth and uHealth 
(http://mhealth.jmir.org), 19.03.2020.

DOI: 10.2196/15699
PMCID: PMC7118552
PMID: 32191213

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: JH has received speaking 
fees from Boehringer Ingelheim and Gebro Pharma. This does not have a real or 
perceived conflict of interest between all these sources and this paper. MCR has 
received speaking fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline 
(GSK), Menarini, and Novartis and consulting fees from GSK, Gebro Pharma, and 
Novartis. This does not have a real or perceived conflict of interest between 
all these sources and this paper. LM has received travel coverings, funds for 
educative activities, research grants, paid advisories, and participated as 
Principal Investigator in randomized controlled trials sponsored by private 
companies or observational studies from Air Liquide, Astra Zeneca, Boston 
Scientific, Boeringher Ingelheim, Chiesi, ESTEVE, GSK Menarini, MSD, Novartis, 
Sanofi, Spanish Scientific Societies, and Government and the European Regional 
Cooperation Fund. This does not have a real or perceived conflict of interest 
between all these sources and this paper. CD has received speaking fees from 
Menarini, GSK, Novartis, Chiesi, Teva, and Ferrer. This does not have a real or 
perceived conflict of interest between all these sources and this paper. FG has 
received speaking fees from GSK, Chiesi, Boehringer Ingelheim, Mundipharma, 
Menarini, Pfizer, Novartis, Esteve, Teva Pharmaceutical, Ferrer, Rovi, Astra 
Zeneca, Bial, and Actelion y Gebro Pharm. This does not have a real or perceived 
conflict of interest between all these sources and this paper.


489. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2020 May;7(1):e000590. doi: 10.1136/bmjresp-2020-000590.

Association between self-reported moderate to vigorous physical activity and the 
rate of outpatient treated COPD exacerbations: retrospective cohort study.

Nguyen HQ(1), Mularski RA(2), Moy ML(3)(4), Lee JS(5), Shen E(5).

Author information:
(1)Research and Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Southern California Research and 
Evaluation, Pasadena, California, USA huong.q2.nguyen@kp.org.
(2)Center for Health Research, Kaiser Permanente Northwest, Portland, Oregon, 
USA.
(3)Pulmonary Division, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Pulmonary Division, VA Boston Health Care System West Roxbury Campus, West 
Roxbury, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Research and Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Southern California Research and 
Evaluation, Pasadena, California, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Little has been published regarding the relationship between 
physical activity (PA) and outpatient treated, mild to moderate acute 
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations (AECOPD). 
The purpose of this study was to determine the association between self-reported 
PA and outpatient treated AECOPD over 2 years using real-world data obtained 
from existing electronic medical records (EMRs).
METHODS: We included 44 896 patients with a chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease diagnosis from the EMR in this retrospective cohort study. Moderate to 
vigorous PA was measured via patient self-report, obtained during routine 
clinical care; patients were classified as inactive (0 min/week), insufficiently 
active (1-149 min/week) or active (≥150 min/week). AECOPDs were measured using 
both encounter and prescription fill (antibiotics and/or oral steroids) data. We 
used Poisson regression models to compare the unadjusted and adjusted rates of 
outpatient treated AECOPD over 2 years across the PA categories.
RESULTS: In adjusted models, the 2-year AECOPD incidence rate ratio (IRR) was 
not different between the inactive and insufficiently inactive groups (IRR 0.98, 
95% CI 0.96 to 1.01) and only marginally meaningful lower for the active group 
(IRR 0.97, 95% CI 0.95 to 0.98). Sensitivity analyses of patients meeting or not 
meeting obstructive criteria produced similar results with generally weak or 
non-significant associations.
CONCLUSION: The lack of an association between PA and AECOPD contrasts with 
previous published findings of a strong relationship between moderate to 
vigorous PA and hospitalisations for severe AECOPD. This difference could 
partially be attributed to the imprecision of our measurements for both the 
exposure and outcome.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjresp-2020-000590
PMCID: PMC7264694
PMID: 32467154

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


490. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Jul;98(27):e15998. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000015998.

Preventing deoxygenation with high flow nasal cannula oxygen during induction of 
general anesthesia for rigid bronchoscopy: Two case reports.

Min JY(1), Jo H, Roh K, Chung MY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Eunpyeong St. Mary's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.

RATIONALE: Rigid bronchoscopy under general anesthesia enables performing 
diagnostic and/or therapeutic procedures in the tracheobronchial tree. As most 
patients undergoing rigid bronchoscopy have moderate to severe respiratory 
disease or central airway obstruction, the operators often face the risk of 
hypoxemia when inserting the rigid bronchoscope into the patients' airway. 
Applying high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) oxygen therapy before the insertion of 
the bronchoscope allows to maintain high fractional inspired oxygen (FiO2) and 
thus leading to maximizing apnea time before desaturation.
PATIENT CONCERNS AND DIAGNOSIS: Case 1: A 70-year-old female patient was 
diagnosed with lung cancer in the left lower lobe and a tracheal mass of about 
2.6 cm * 0.8 cm in size.Case 2: A male patient, 77 years old, 55.7 kg and 
157.3 cm in height, had been diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, and was scheduled for the bronchoscopic volume reduction surgery upon 
exacerbation of his symptoms of dyspnea and cough with sputum.
INTERVENTIONS: Preoxygenation was performed with HFNC (Fisher&Paykel Optiflow 
Thrive, New Zealand) for 3 minutes before the administration of anesthetic 
medications. The oxygen flow was set at 50 L/min and the FiO2 at 1.0. SpO2 
increased to 100%.
OUTCOMES: The HFNC oxygen has shown its effectiveness in safely maintaining the 
patients' SpO2 during the prolonged apneic period of inserting bronchoscope.
LESSONS: HFNC oxygen is an effective tool in oxygenating the patients during the 
induction of rigid bronchoscopy, and that it may be a superior alternative to 
the conventional method of preoxygenation.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000015998
PMCID: PMC6635262
PMID: 31277092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


491. J Clin Med. 2020 May 18;9(5):1512. doi: 10.3390/jcm9051512.

Decline in Carbon Monoxide Transfer Coefficient in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease.

Kim YW(1), Lee CH(2), Hwang HG(3), Kim YI(4), Kim DK(2)(5), Oh YM(6), Lee SH(7), 
Kim KU(8), Lee SD(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam 13620, Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.
(3)Department of Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Gumi's Hospital, Asan 39371, 
Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Chonnam National University Hospital, 
Gwangju 61469, Korea.
(5)Seoul Metropolitan Government-Seoul National University Boramae Medical 
Center (SMG-SNU Boramae Medical Center), SNU, Seoul 07061, Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 05505, Korea.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Eunpyeong St. Mary's Hospital, College of 
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 03312, Korea.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University School of 
Medicine, Busan 49241, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Although a reduced carbon monoxide transfer coefficient (Kco) is an 
important feature in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), how it 
changes over time and its relationship with other clinical outcomes remain 
unclear. This study evaluated longitudinal changes in Kco and their relationship 
with other clinical outcomes.
METHODS: We evaluated patients with COPD from the Korean Obstructive Lung 
Disease cohort, followed up for up to ten years. Random coefficient models were 
used to assess the annual change in Kco over time. Participants were categorized 
into tertiles according to Kco decline rate. Baseline characteristics and 
outcomes, including changes in FEV1 and emphysema index, incidence of 
exacerbations, and mortality, were compared between categories.
RESULTS: A decline in Kco was observed in 92.9% of the 211 enrolled participants 
with COPD. Those with the most rapid decline (tertile 1) had a lower FEV1/FVC% 
(tertile 1: 43.8% ± 9.7%, tertile 2: 46.4% ± 10.5%, tertile 3: 49.2% ± 10.4%, p 
= 0.008) and a higher emphysema index at baseline (27.7 ± 14.8, 22.4 ± 16.1, 
18.1 ± 14.5, respectively, p = 0.001). Tertile 3 showed a lower decline rate in 
FEV1 (16.3 vs. 27.1 mL/yr, p = 0.017) and a lower incidence of exacerbations 
(incidence rate ratio = 0.66, 95% CI = 0.44-0.99) than tertile 1. There were no 
differences in the change in emphysema index and mortality between categories.
CONCLUSION: Most patients with COPD experienced Kco decline over time, which was 
greater in patients with more severe airflow limitation and emphysema. Decline 
in Kco was associated with an accelerated decline in FEV1 and more frequent 
exacerbations; hence, this should be considered as an important outcome measure 
in further studies.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9051512
PMCID: PMC7290811
PMID: 32443426

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


492. Clin Ther. 2020 Apr;42(4):634-648. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2020.02.012. Epub 
2020 Apr 3.

Relative Bioavailability of Budesonide/Glycopyrrolate/Formoterol Fumarate 
Metered Dose Inhaler Administered With and Without a Spacer: Results of a Phase 
I, Randomized, Crossover Trial in Healthy Adults.

Dorinsky P(1), DePetrillo P(2), DeAngelis K(3), Trivedi R(3), Darken P(4), 
Gillen M(5).

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA. Electronic address: 
paul.dorinsky1@astrazeneca.com.
(2)Pharmaron, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(5)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

PURPOSE: The triple combination therapy budesonide/glycopyrrolate/formoterol 
fumarate in a metered dose inhaler (BGF MDI), formulated by using innovative 
co-suspension delivery technology, is a new inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist/long-acting β2-agonist fixed-dose combination for the 
maintenance treatment of COPD. For some patients, the use of an MDI may be 
optimized with a spacer. This Phase I study assessed the effect of a spacer on 
lung exposure, total systemic exposure, and safety of BGF MDI 320/36/9.6 μg in 
healthy subjects.
METHODS: This randomized, open-label, crossover study assessed the 
pharmacokinetic and safety profiles of BGF MDI in healthy adult subjects who 
received a single dose of BGF MDI 320/36/9.6 μg (administered as 2 inhalations 
with 160/18/4.8 μg per actuation) in 4 regimens: without spacer and no charcoal; 
with spacer and no charcoal; without spacer and with charcoal; and with spacer 
and with charcoal. Primary objectives were to assess total systemic exposure 
(without charcoal) and lung exposure (with charcoal) of budesonide, 
glycopyrronium, and formoterol administered as BGF MDI with and without a 
spacer. Safety was also assessed.
FINDINGS: In total, 56 subjects were randomized (mean age, 29.9 years; 60.7% 
male, 17.9% former smokers). For systemic exposure (without charcoal), the 
spacer/without spacer ratio, expressed as a percentage (intrasubject %CV) of 
Cmax and AUC0-tlast, respectively, was 152.0 (47.5) and 132.8 (43.6) for 
budesonide, 240.6 (80.2) and 154.7 (73.4) for glycopyrronium, and 165.6 (50.7) 
and 98.6 (53.8) for formoterol. For lung exposure (with charcoal), the 
spacer/without spacer ratio percentage (%CV) of Cmax and AUC0-tlast, 
respectively, was 183.6 (65.9) and 198.4 (71.5) for budesonide, 262.0 (91.8) and 
373.9 (120.7) for glycopyrronium, and 222.9 (56.3) and 385.2 (147.0) for 
formoterol. Subjects who were judged to have suboptimal inhalation technique 
without a spacer (those in the lowest drug exposure quartile based on 
AUC0-tlast) had the greatest increase in both total systemic and lung exposure 
when a spacer was used versus no spacer. Subjects in the highest quartile had a 
minimal change in both total systemic and lung exposure when the spacer was 
used. Treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) (all mild/moderate) reported by 
>1 subject per regimen were headache, cough, and dizziness. One subject withdrew 
because of TEAEs of headache and presyncope (neither considered 
treatment-related).
IMPLICATIONS: Drug delivery can be improved for subjects with suboptimal MDI 
inhalation technique when using a spacer device with BGF MDI triple therapy. 
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03311373.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2020.02.012
PMID: 32253054

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Dr. Dorinsky and Mr Gillen are 
employees of AstraZeneca and hold stock and/or stock options in the company. Ms. 
Trivedi and Dr. Darken are employees of AstraZeneca. Dr. DeAngelis is a former 
employee of AstraZeneca and holds stock and/or stock options in the company. Dr. 
DePetrillo is an employee of Pharmaron CPC. Employees of AstraZeneca were 
involved in various aspects of the conception and design of the studies, 
acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data, and input into 
manuscript development. The sponsor did not place any restrictions on authors 
about the statements made in the final article. Data underlying the findings 
described in this manuscript may be obtained in accordance with AstraZeneca's 
data sharing policy described at: 
https://astrazenecagrouptrials.pharmacm.com/ST/Submission/Disclosure.


493. Respir Med Case Rep. 2020 Mar 27;30:101044. doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2020.101044. 
eCollection 2020.

Recurrent episodes of hypercapnic respiratory failure triggered by panic attacks 
in a patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Oleynick C(1).

Author information:
(1)Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

A 67-year old female with moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
and generalized anxiety disorder presents with three episodes of severe 
hypercapnic respiratory failure over the previous three months without a clear 
precipitant that were treated with invasive and non-invasive ventilation. These 
episodes were labelled as acute exacerbations of COPD, however she lacked any 
typical features or triggers and responded faster than expected to treatment and 
she underwent extensive investigations to identify an alternative etiology. 
While admitted and under observation, she became extremely anxious, began to 
hyperventilate and went into hypercapnic respiratory failure, which was 
successfully aborted with sublingual lorazepam causing resolution of tachypnea. 
It became clear that the patient was suffering from panic attacks as the 
precipitant for her respiratory failure and she was successfully treated with 
psychiatric medication and breakthrough anxiolytics. Anxiety and panic disorders 
are more prevalent in patients with COPD than the general population and 
effective management is important as patient's with anxiety and COPD have worse 
clinical outcomes than with COPD alone. Additionally, panic attacks should be 
considered as an etiology for hypercapnic respiratory failure in patients with 
COPD and anxiety when the clinical presentation is atypical.

Crown Copyright © 2020 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2020.101044
PMCID: PMC7118310
PMID: 32257794

Conflict of interest statement: I have no financial or non-financial competing 
interests related to this case report.


494. Zhonghua Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue. 2020 Jan;32(1):14-19. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.cn121430-20191219-00003.

[Non-invasive ventilation with helmet in patients with respiratory failure 
caused by acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Q(1), Lu H(1), Shan M(1), Wang W(2), Zhu C(1), Chen R(3), Zhang Z(4), Lan C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Open Laboratory of Key Subjects of Clinical Medicine in Colleges and 
Universities of Henan Province of China, Zhengzhou 450052, Henan, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Evaluation, Henan Medical Association, Zhengzhou 
450003, Henan, China.
(3)Shenzhen Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Respiratory and 
Critical Medicine, Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen 518020, Guangdong, 
China.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Medicine, the First Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450052, Henan, China. Corresponding 
author: Liu Qi, Email: qi.liu@vip.163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect and tolerance of non-invasive ventilation 
(NIV) with helmet in patients with respiratory failure caused by acute 
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) and the effect on 
improving blood gas, alleviating dyspnea and the occurrence of complications.
METHODS: Patients with AECOPD and respiratory failure admitted to emergency 
intensive care unit (EICU) and respiratory intensive care unit (RICU) of the 
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University from January 1st, 2018 to May 
31st, 2019 were enrolled. After obtaining the informed consent of the patients 
or their authorized family members, the patients were divided into two groups: 
the helmet group and the facial mask group by random number table. NIV was 
carried out by using helmet or facial mask, respectively. During the course of 
NIV (immediately, 1 hour, 4 hours and at the end of NIV), the tolerance score, 
blood gas analysis, heart rate (HR), respiratory rate (RR) of patients were 
monitored, and the incidence of tracheal intubation, in-hospital mortality and 
complications were observed. Kaplan-Meier survival curve was plotted to analyze 
the 30-day cumulative survival of the two groups.
RESULTS: A total of 82 patients with AECOPD and respiratory failure were 
included during the study period. After excluding patients with the oxygenation 
index (PaO2/FiO2) > 200 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa), with tracheal intubation or 
invasive ventilation, suffering from acute myocardial infarction, severe trauma 
within 2 weeks, excessive secretion, sputum discharge disorder or refusal to 
participate in the study, 26 patients were finally enrolled in the analysis, 
randomly assigned to the helmet group and the facial mask group, with 13 
patients in each group. The PaO2/FiO2 after NIV of patients in both groups was 
increased significantly as compared with that immediately after NIV, without 
significant difference between the two groups, but the increase in PaO2/FiO2 at 
the end of NIV compared with immediately after NIV in the helmet group was 
significantly higher than that in the facial mask group (mmHg: 75.1±73.2 vs. 
7.7±86.0, P < 0.05). RR at each time point after NIV in the two groups was lower 
than that immediately after NIV, especially in the helmet group. There were 
significant differences between the helmet group and facial mask group at 1 
hour, 4 hours, and the end of NIV (times/min: 17.5±4.1 vs. 23.1±6.3 at 1 hour, 
16.2±2.5 vs. 20.0±5.5 at 4 hours, 15.5±2.5 vs. 21.2±5.9 at the end of NIV, all P 
< 0.05). The NIV tolerance score of the helmet group at 4 hours and the end was 
significantly higher than that of the facial mask group (4 hours: 3.9±0.3 vs. 
3.3±0.9, at the end of NIV: 3.8±0.6 vs. 2.9±0.9, both P < 0.05). There was no 
significant difference in the improvement of pH value, arterial partial pressure 
of carbon dioxide (PaCO2), or HR between helmet group and facial mask group. The 
total number of complications (cases: 3 vs. 8) and the nasal skin lesions 
(cases: 0 vs. 4) in the helmet group were significantly less than those in the 
facial mask group (both P < 0.05). Only 2 patients in the helmet group received 
endotracheal intubation, and 1 of them died; 5 patients in the facial mask group 
received endotracheal intubation, and 3 of them died; there was no significant 
difference between the two groups (both P > 0.05). The Kaplan-Meier survival 
curve analysis showed that the cumulative survival rate of 30 days in the helmet 
group was lower than that in the facial mask group, but the difference was not 
statistically significant (Log-Rank test: χ2 = 1.278, P = 0.258).
CONCLUSIONS: NIV with helmet has better comfort for patients with AECOPD 
combined with respiratory failure, and better effect on improving oxygenation 
and relieving dyspnea, and its effect on carbon dioxide emissions is not 
inferior to that of traditional mask NIV.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn121430-20191219-00003
PMID: 32148225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020 Apr 19:S2213-2198(20)30364-0. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2020.04.013. Online ahead of print.

Tiotropium Respimat Efficacy and Safety in Asthma: Relationship to Age.

Doherty DE(1), Bleecker ER(2), Moroni-Zentgraf P(3), Zaremba-Pechmann L(4), 
Kerstjens HAM(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Kentucky, Lexington, Ky. Electronic address: 
dedohe0@email.uky.edu.
(2)University of Arizona, Tucson, Ariz.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim Pty. Ltd., Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim, Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
(5)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, and Groningen 
Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Data are limited on the differential response to long-acting 
bronchodilators in older versus younger adults with asthma.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the response to tiotropium Respimat differed in 
older versus younger patients with asthma.
METHODS: Post hoc analyses of 4 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
studies in adults with asthma were carried out. Two studies compared tiotropium 
Respimat 5 μg once daily with placebo, both added to high-dose inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) plus long-acting β2-agonist (ie, severe asthma). The other 
2 evaluated tiotropium Respimat 2.5 or 5 μg once daily, salmeterol 50 μg twice 
daily, or placebo, all added to medium-dose ICS (moderate asthma). Data were 
analyzed in 2 pools: (1) severe and (2) moderate asthma. Efficacy end points: 
trough and peak FEV1; trough forced vital capacity; Asthma Control Questionnaire 
total score and responder percentage, all at week 24. One set of analyses was 
performed with age as a continuous covariate; the second was conducted in 
categories less than 40, 40 to 60, and more than 60 years, with treatment-by-age 
subgroup interaction P values obtained. Safety was analyzed in age categories.
RESULTS: Across the age categories, treatment-by-age subgroup interaction P 
values for trough FEV1 were .13 and .77 for patients with severe and moderate 
asthma, respectively, not indicating significant impact of age on overall 
treatment effect, with this observation replicated in the 2 continuum analyses. 
The other end points (including safety) were also not impacted by age.
CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily tiotropium Respimat add-on to ICS or ICS/long-acting 
β2-agonist therapy was effective and well tolerated in patients with asthma 
independent of age.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2020.04.013
PMID: 32320797


496. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2020 Jan 1;318(1):L59-L64. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00319.2019. Epub 2019 Oct 30.

Cigarette smoke exposure alters phosphodiesterases in human structural lung 
cells.

Zuo H(1)(2)(3), Faiz A(2)(4)(5)(6), van den Berge M(2)(4), Mudiyanselage 
SNHR(6), Borghuis T(2)(7), Timens W(2)(7), Nikolaev VO(3)(8), Burgess JK(2)(7), 
Schmidt M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen 
Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Experimental Cardiovascular Research, University Medical Centre 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)University of Groningen, Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Emphysema Center, Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, The University of 
Sydney, Glebe, New South Wales, Australia.
(6)Faculty of Science, University of Technology Sydney, Respiratory 
Bioinformatics and Molecular Biology, Ultimo, New South Wales, Australia.
(7)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Pathology and Medical Biology, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(8)German Center for Cardiovascular Research, Hamburg, Germany.

Cigarette smoke (CS), a highly complex mixture containing more than 4,000 
compounds, causes aberrant cell responses leading to tissue damage around the 
airways and alveoli, which underlies various lung diseases. Phosphodiesterases 
(PDEs) are a family of enzymes that hydrolyze cyclic nucleotides. PDE inhibition 
induces bronchodilation, reduces the activation and recruitment of inflammatory 
cells, and the release of various cytokines. Currently, the selective PDE4 
inhibitor roflumilast is an approved add-on treatment for patients with severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with chronic bronchitis and a history of 
frequent exacerbations. Additional selective PDE inhibitors are being tested in 
preclinical and clinical studies. However, the effect of chronic CS exposure on 
the expression of PDEs is unknown. Using mRNA isolated from nasal and bronchial 
brushes and lung tissues of never smokers and current smokers, we compared the 
gene expression of 25 PDE coding genes. Additionally, the expression and 
distribution of PDE3A and PDE4D in human lung tissues was examined. This study 
reveals that chronic CS exposure modulates the expression of various PDE 
members. Thus, CS exposure may change the levels of intracellular cyclic 
nucleotides and thereby impact the efficiency of PDE-targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00319.2019
PMID: 31664853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2020 May;14(5):493-500. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2020.1732823. Epub 2020 Feb 21.

How may we improve clinical outcomes for patients hospitalized with acute 
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? A narrative review about 
possible therapeutic and preventive strategies.

Crisafulli E(1), Manco A(2), Torres A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Respiratory Medicine Unit and Section of Internal 
Medicine, University of Verona and Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata 
of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, Respiratory Disease and Lung Function 
Unit, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Pneumology Department, Clinic Institute of Thorax (ICT), Hospital Clinic of 
Barcelona - Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS) - 
University of Barcelona - Ciber de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 
Barcelona, Spain.

Introduction: In a subset of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD)patients the course of the disease is complicated by a severe acute 
exacerbations (AECOPD) that may require hospitalization, at which time negative 
outcomes may occur up to 30 days after discharge. Several predictors of negative 
outcomes have been documented.Areas covered: We considered five negative 
outcomes related to patients hospitalized with AECOPD: treatment failure, 
noninvasive mechanical ventilation (NIMV) failure, prolonged length of hospital 
stay (LHS), short-term mortality (≤ 90 days from admission and including the 
in-hospital mortality), and early readmission (≤30 days from discharge). 
Possible therapeutic and preventive strategies to improve these outcomes are 
outlined and discussed.Expert opinion: Several strategies have been proposed to 
improve outcomes. Among these, steroid or antibiotic use may reduce the risks of 
treatment failure or of prolonged hospital stay. We note that operator-related 
factors may influence the outcome of NIMV. However, little has been documented 
about the short-term mortality or early readmission rates. In general, few 
interventions consistently improve negative outcomes and prognosis of AECOPD.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2020.1732823
PMID: 32077337


498. J Med Case Rep. 2019 May 3;13(1):123. doi: 10.1186/s13256-019-2051-6.

Regional anticoagulation with heparin of an extracorporeal CO(2) removal 
circuit: a case report.

Tramarin J(1), Cortegiani A(2), Gregoretti C(2), Vitale F(3), Palmeri C(2), 
Iozzo P(3), Forfori F(4), Giarratano A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical, Oncological and Oral Science (Di.Chir.On.S.), Section 
of Anesthesia, Analgesia, Intensive Care and Emergency, Policlinico Paolo 
Giaccone, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. trama21@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Surgical, Oncological and Oral Science (Di.Chir.On.S.), Section 
of Anesthesia, Analgesia, Intensive Care and Emergency, Policlinico Paolo 
Giaccone, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(3)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, University of Palermo, Palermo, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal is an increasingly used 
respiratory support technique. As is true of all extracorporeal techniques, 
extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal needs proper anticoagulation. We report a 
case of a patient at risk of bleeding complications who was treated with 
extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal and anticoagulated with a regional 
technique.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 56-year-old Caucasian man with a history of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation required extracorporeal carbon 
dioxide removal for severe hypercapnia and acidosis despite mechanical 
ventilation. The extracorporeal circuit was anticoagulated using a regional 
heparin technique to limit the patient's risk of bleeding due to a low platelet 
count. The patient underwent 96 h of effective extracorporeal carbon dioxide 
removal without any adverse events. He was successfully weaned from 
extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal. During the treatment, no bleeding 
complications or unexpected circuit clotting was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of regional heparin anticoagulation technique seems to be 
feasible and safe during extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal.

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-019-2051-6
PMCID: PMC6498662
PMID: 31046832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent was obtained from 
the patient’s relatives for publication of this case report and any accompanying 
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the 
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.


499. Eur Respir J. 2020 Apr 23;55(4):2000764. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00764-2020. Print 
2020 Apr.

Urgent need of a management plan for survivors of COVID-19.

Celli B(1), Fabbri LM(2).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Wellesley, MA, USA.
(2)University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Jul 1;198(1):51-57.

Acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD) or “COPD crises” [1], are crucial events in 
the natural course of COPD. Although they can occur at any severity stage, their 
impact increases as patients develop more severe airflow limitation.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00764-2020
PMCID: PMC7098479
PMID: 32217657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: B. Celli reports personal 
fees and research facilities from AstraZeneca, personal fees for consultancy 
from GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Sanofi Aventis and 
Menarini outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: L.M. Fabbri reports 
personal fees and non-financial support from AstraZeneca, Chiesi, GSK, Novartis, 
Boehringer Ingelheim and Zambon, personal fees from Lusofarmaco, outside the 
submitted work.


500. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 May;99(18):e20035. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000020035.

Traditional Chinese medicine may reduce the dosage of systemic glucocorticoids 
in required patients with acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease: Study protocol for a randomized placebo-controlled trial.

Zhao K(1), Chen K(1), Huang Q(1), Gao P(2), Zhang C(1), Yang H(1), Gan W(1), 
Xiao W(1), Sun Z(1), Xie X(1), Long K(2), Zhang S(2), Chen J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine.
(2)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Hospital of Chengdu University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China.

INTRODUCTION: Acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(AECOPD) involves a severe inflammatory response. Systemic glucocorticoids are 
very important for the treatment of the acute exacerbation period; however, 
their use causes serious adverse effects. There is still no evidence on whether 
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) can be used to reduce the dosage of systemic 
glucocorticoids in the treatment of patients with AECOPD.
METHODS: In this trial, we plan to enroll 204 eligible patients with AECOPD who 
will be randomly assigned to receive TCM or a placebo. The effect of TCM in the 
treatment of patients with AECOPD will be measured by the dosage of systemic 
glucocorticoids (at which COPD assessment test [CAT] scores improve by 50%). 
Safety will also be assessed.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ChiCTR2000029568.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000020035
PMID: 32358383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


501. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2019 Mar;25(2):132-137. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000553.

Initiating drug therapy in early stage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 
does it impact the course and outcome?

Burkes RM(1), Drummond MB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Early chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is 
emerging in importance for the clinical and research settings. This review will 
highlight a proposed definition of early COPD, examine early and midlife factors 
that lead to development of early COPD and review the literature pertaining to 
the treatment of mild COPD to gain insight into potential therapeutic approaches 
for early disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Early COPD can be defined as disease occurring in patients 
younger than 50 years in age with a 10-pack-year or more smoking history and 
abnormal spirometry, imaging or lung function decline. Childhood exposures 
(maternal smoking and recurrent respiratory infections), childhood and adult 
asthma, and smoking affect middle-age lung function. Multiple studies of 
long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) in mild COPD have shown improvements 
in lung function and symptoms scores. Smoking cessation also has a beneficial 
effect on longitudinal lung function.
SUMMARY: Early COPD is an important manifestation of COPD, with a newly proposed 
definition and associated risk factors identified. Inferring from studies on 
mild COPD cohorts, LAMAs and smoking cessation may have a positive effect on 
longitudinal lung function and symptomatic improvement.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000553
PMCID: PMC6349494
PMID: 30461533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: MBD has served as a 
consultant for AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Parion 
Sciences. RMB is supported through a grant from the National Institutes of 
Health.


502. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Feb 3;15:249-259. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S237545. eCollection 2020.

CODEXS: A New Multidimensional Index to Better Predict Frequent COPD 
Exacerbators with Inclusion of Depression Score.

Deng D(#)(1), Zhou A(#)(2)(3)(4), Chen P(2)(3)(4), Shuang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Affiliated People's Hospital of 
Shaoyang College, Shaoyang, Hunan 422001, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Medicine, Second Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, People's Republic of China.
(3)Respiratory Disease Research Unit, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 
410011, People's Republic of China.
(4)Respiratory Disease Diagnosis and Treatment Center, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan 410011, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Depression is reported in association with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). However, to date, no multidimensional indices have 
taken depression into consideration to predict COPD patients' prognosis. This 
study aimed to determine whether a new multidimensional index named CODEXS, 
based on comorbidities, airflow obstruction, dyspnea, previous exacerbation and 
depression assessed by Self-Rating Depression Scale (SDS), could predict 1-year 
exacerbations.
METHODS: This was a prospective study, patients with stable COPD were used to 
develop CODEXS at the first visit, and followed up in the 3rd, 6th, and 12th 
months. After the last visit, patients were divided into frequent and infrequent 
exacerbators. Another cohort of COPD patients was used for validation. The SDS 
scoring system in the multidimensional indices ranged from 0 to 4 based on the 
modified SDS value, representing no depression (25-39 [0], 40-49 [1]), mild 
depression (50-59), moderate depression (60-69), and severe depression (≥70). 
Comorbidity, dyspnea, airflow obstruction, and severe exacerbations were 
calculated according to CODEX thresholds.
RESULTS: Two sets of 105 and 107 patients were recruited in the development and 
validation cohorts, respectively. Depression was demonstrated as an independent 
risk factor for frequent exacerbators (odds ratio (OR)= 1.14, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) = 1.06-1.23, P < 0.001). The prevalence of depression in frequent 
exacerbators (35.09%) was higher than that in infrequent exacerbators. CODEXS 
was significantly associated with exacerbation (OR =2.91; 95% CI, 1.89-4.48, 
p<0.001). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve comparison showed that 
CODEXS was superior to BODEX(BMI, airflow obstruction, dyspnea, previous 
exacerbation), BODE (BMI, airflow obstruction, dyspnea, exercise), and updated 
ADO (age, dyspnea, and airflow obstruction) indices, confirmed by the validation 
cohort with sensitivity at 85.94% and specificity at 76.74%.
CONCLUSION: Depression is an independent risk factor for COPD exacerbation. 
CODEXS is a useful predictor for predicting frequent exacerbators within 1 year 
and is superior to other previously published indices.

© 2020 Deng et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S237545
PMCID: PMC7006851
PMID: 32099350

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


503. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Apr 16;15:787-797. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S247156. eCollection 2020.

Modelling the Cost-Effectiveness of Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium versus 
Salmeterol/Fluticasone Using a Novel Markov Exacerbation-Based Approach.

Lakhotia B(1), Mahon R(1), Gutzwiller FS(2), Danyliv A(1), Nikolaev I(2), 
Thokala P(3).

Author information:
(1)Novartis Ireland Limited, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Novartis Pharma, Basel, AG, Switzerland.
(3)PT Health Economics Ltd, Sheffield, UK.

PURPOSE: Exacerbations drive outcomes and costs in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). While patient-level (micro) simulation cost-effectiveness models 
have been developed that include exacerbations, such models are complex. We 
developed a novel, exacerbation-based model to assess the cost-effectiveness of 
indacaterol/glycopyrronium (IND/GLY) versus salmeterol/fluticasone (SFC) in 
COPD, using a Markov structure as a simplification of a previously validated 
microsimulation model.
METHODS: The Markov model included three health states: infrequent or frequent 
exacerbator (IE or FE; ≤1 or ≥2 moderate/severe exacerbations in prior 12 
months, respectively), or death. The model used data from the FLAME study and 
was run over a 10-year horizon. Cycle length was 1 year, after which patients 
remained in the same health state or transitioned to another. Analysis was 
conducted from a Swedish payer's perspective (Swedish healthcare costs, 
converted into Euros), with incremental costs and quality-adjusted life-years 
(QALYs) calculated (discounted 3% annually).
RESULTS: At all post-baseline timepoints, IND/GLY was associated with more 
patients in the IE health state and fewer patients in the FE and dead states 
relative to SFC. Over a 10-year period, IND/GLY was associated with a cost 
saving of €1,887/patient, an incremental benefit of 0.142 QALYs, and an addition 
of 0.057 life-years, compared with SFC.
CONCLUSION: This Markov model represents a novel cost-effectiveness analysis for 
COPD, with simpler methodology than prior microsimulation models, while 
retaining exacerbations as drivers of disease progression. In patients with COPD 
with a history of exacerbations in the previous year, IND/GLY is a 
cost-effective treatment option compared with SFC.

© 2020 Lakhotia et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S247156
PMCID: PMC7174156
PMID: 32368025

Conflict of interest statement: Ronan Mahon, Florian Gutzwiller, Andrii Danyliv 
and Ivan Nikolaev are Novartis employees and hold shares in Novartis. Bhavesh 
Lakhotia was an intern at Novartis Ireland Limited and is employed by LexisNexis 
Risk Solutions, Ireland. Praveen Thokala is a Director and employee of PT Health 
Economics Ltd and received personal fees from Novartis. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this work.


504. J Asthma Allergy. 2019 Oct 7;12:309-321. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S216932. eCollection 
2019.

Characterizing Real-World Use Of Tiotropium In Asthma In The USA.

Averell CM(1), Laliberté F(2), Duh MS(3), Wu JW(2), Germain G(2), Faison S(4).

Author information:
(1)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
USA.
(2)Groupe d'analyse, Ltée, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Analysis Group, Inc, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)US Medical Affairs, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium bromide (TIO) is a long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
recommended as an add-on therapy option for patients with uncontrolled asthma on 
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting β2-agonists (LABA). However, 
real-world data on TIO use in asthma remains limited. To identify unmet needs, 
this study explored the use of TIO in US patients with asthma.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study used IQVIATM Health Plan Claims Data 
(October 1, 2014─December 31, 2016). Patients with asthma diagnoses initiating 
TIO 1.25 or 2.5 mcg after September 16, 2015 (first dispensing on index date) 
with ≥6 and ≥3 months continuous enrollment pre- and post-index, respectively, 
were identified. Patients with COPD diagnoses were excluded. Baseline 
characteristics, healthcare resource utilization and costs, and treatment 
patterns before and following TIO initiation were described for TIO cohorts and 
subgroups classified by concomitant medications received during the 30-day 
period after initiation.
RESULTS: The study included 766 TIO 1.25 mcg and 1055 TIO 2.5 mcg users. In the 
TIO 1.25 mcg cohort, 16% (126/766) used TIO monotherapy while 61% (465/766) used 
TIO+ICS/LABA± leukotriene receptor antagonists (triple therapy). In TIO 1.25 mcg 
monotherapy and triple therapy subgroups, 39% and 49% were treated by 
allergists/pulmonologists, 27% and 48% experienced a moderate/severe asthma 
exacerbation, and 50% and 68% used rescue oral corticosteroids during the 
baseline period, respectively. Following triple therapy initiation, 44% of 
patients discontinued ICS within 6 months. The TIO 2.5 mcg cohort demonstrated 
similar trends.
CONCLUSION: This study provided insights into real-world US use of TIO in 
asthma. Overall, 16-19% of patients received TIO monotherapy and had high 
baseline exacerbation rates, suggesting that additional ICS-containing 
medication may be beneficial. Patients initiating triple therapy were among the 
most severe, with high baseline exacerbation rates and rescue medication use, 
and had high post-treatment ICS discontinuation rates, suggesting unmet needs in 
this population.

© 2019 Averell et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S216932
PMCID: PMC6789414
PMID: 31632091

Conflict of interest statement: CMA and SF are employees of GSK and hold 
stocks/shares in GSK. FL, GG, JWW, and MSD are employees of Analysis Group, 
Inc., a consulting company that has received research funds from GSK to conduct 
this study. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


505. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2020 Jan;7(1):38-48. doi: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.1.2019.0132.

Validation and Assessment of the COPD Treatment Ratio as a Predictor of Severe 
Exacerbations.

Stanford RH(1)(2), Korrer S(3), Brekke L(3), Reinsch T(1), Bengtson LGS(3).

Author information:
(1)Strategic Consulting, AESARA, Inc., Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Outcomes and Policy, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill.
(3)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum Inc., Eden Prairie, Minnesota.

BACKGROUND: Population-based risk assessments are needed to identify individuals 
who may benefit from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) management 
programs for preventing exacerbations. This study compared the validated COPD 
treatment ratio (CTR) versus other COPD exacerbation predictors: prior 
exacerbation and rescue and maintenance medication use.
METHODS: A retrospective observational study using medical and pharmacy claims 
data among Medicare Advantage with Part D beneficiaries with COPD (January 
2011-August 2016). Unadjusted and adjusted logistic regression models tested the 
predictive performance (C-statistic) of potential exacerbation predictors for 
future severe exacerbations.
RESULTS: The unadjusted association between exacerbation predictors and severe 
exacerbation was examined in 60,776 patients: baseline severe exacerbation had 
the highest C-statistic (0.668), then number of rescue units dispensed (0.651), 
CTR (0.619), and number of controller units dispensed (0.562). During the 
at-risk period, baseline CTR was inversely associated with severe exacerbation 
(odds ratio, <1.0); other predictors were positively associated with a severe 
exacerbation (odds ratio, >1.0). Adjusting for age, geographic region, chronic 
oxygen, and nebulizer use, the severe exacerbation odds were 0.90 (95% 
confidence interval [CI], 0.89-0.91) lower per 0.10 change in CTR (C-statistic, 
0.710). The C-statistic was 0.734 when baseline exacerbation was added to the 
model.
CONCLUSIONS: The CTR is an effective tool for identifying patients diagnosed 
with COPD who are at increased risk of severe exacerbation. Although CTR does 
not predict future exacerbation as well as prior severe exacerbation history, it 
has the advantage of being applicable in predicting future exacerbations in 
patients without an exacerbation history, or in databases limited to pharmacy 
claims only. In addition, the significant reduction in risk has been observed 
with incremental increases in the ratio: the ratio can be monitored to assess 
COPD health improvements over time.

JCOPDF © 2020.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.1.2019.0132
PMCID: PMC7182384
PMID: 31999901

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following conflicts of 
interest during the last 3 years in relation to this article: At the time of the 
study, RHS was an employee of GlaxoSmithKline plc and holds stock 
options/shares. At the time of the study, TR was a fellow at UNC. SK, LB, and 
LGSB are employees of Optum; GlaxoSmithKline plc contracted with Optum to 
conduct this research.


506. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2019 Jun 25;6:79. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2019.00079. 
eCollection 2019.

Karma of Cardiovascular Disease Risk Factors for Prevention and Management of 
Major Cardiovascular Events in the Context of Acute Exacerbations of Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Crisan L(1), Wong N(1), Sin DD(2), Lee HM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Heart Disease Prevention Program, Division of Cardiology, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
British Columbia and Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States.

There is compelling epidemiological evidence that airway exposure to cigarette 
smoke, air pollution particles, as well as bacterial and viral pathogens is 
strongly related to acute ischemic events. Over the years, there have been 
important animal and human studies that have provided experimental evidence to 
support a causal link. Studies show that patients with cardiovascular diseases 
(CVDs) or risk factors for CVD are more likely to have major adverse 
cardiovascular events (MACEs) after an acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), and patients with more severe COPD have higher 
cardiovascular mortality and morbidity than those with less severe COPD. The 
risk of MACEs in acute exacerbation of COPD is determined by the complex 
interactions between genetics, behavioral, metabolic, infectious, and 
environmental risk factors. To date, there are no guidelines regarding the 
prevention, screening, and management of the modifiable risk factors for MACEs 
in the context of COPD or COPD exacerbations, and there is insufficient CVD risk 
control in those with COPD. A deeper insight of the modifiable risk factors 
shared by CVD, COPD, and acute exacerbations of COPD may improve the strategies 
for reduction of MACEs in patients with COPD through vaccination, tight control 
of traditional CV risk factors and modifying lifestyle. This review summarizes 
the most recent studies regarding the pathophysiology and epidemiology of 
modifiable risk factors shared by CVD, COPD, and COPD exacerbations that could 
influence overall morbidity and mortality due to MACEs in patients with acute 
exacerbations of COPD.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2019.00079
PMCID: PMC6603127
PMID: 31294030


507. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2020 Feb;36(2):107-113. doi: 10.1002/kjm2.12147. Epub 2019 
Nov 29.

Dynamic changes of gut and lung microorganisms during chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease exacerbations.

Sun Z(1)(2), Zhu QL(2), Shen Y(2), Yan T(2), Zhou X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiration Medicine, Shanghai General Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai, China.

Increasing evidence has indicated the intimate relationship between the 
gastrointestinal tract and respiratory tract. The microbial ecosystem has been 
confirmed to share key conceptual features with gut-lung microbiome disorder and 
dysregulation during chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. 
However, the dynamic changes of the gut-lung microbiome during COPD 
exacerbations and its potential role in disease etiology remain poorly 
understood. The present study investigated the dynamic changes of gut and lung 
microorganisms during acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (AECOPD). A longitudinal 16S ribosomal DNA survey of the gut and lung 
microbiome was completed on 90 feces and sputum samples collected from 15 
subjects with AECOPD at three visits, which were defined as exacerbation, 
seven-day stable state. The present analysis revealed a dynamic gut-lung 
microbiota, where changes appeared to be associated with exacerbation events 
indicative of specific exacerbation phenotypes. Antibiotic and steroid 
treatments appeared to have differential effects on the gut-lung microbiome, and 
the microbiome was associated with disease progression, but not with severity. 
The abundance and diversity of the microbiome was strongly influenced by the 
disease progression and therapy. Using culture-independent methods to impact the 
gut and lung microbiota on AECOPD may be the key to understanding the 
interactions between the gut and lung, highlighting its potential as a 
biomarker, and possibly a target for future respiratory therapeutics.

© 2019 The Authors. The Kaohsiung Journal of Medical Sciences published by John 
Wiley & Sons Australia on behalf of Kaohsiung Medical University.

DOI: 10.1002/kjm2.12147
PMID: 31782610


508. Pulm Ther. 2019 Dec;5(2):179-190. doi: 10.1007/s41030-019-00098-1. Epub 2019 Aug 
7.

Predictors of Symptom Burden in Patients with COPD on LAMA Monotherapy: 
Multivariable Analysis of a Claims-Linked Survey Study.

Hahn B(1), Stanford RH(2), Hunter AG(3), White J(3), Essoi B(3), Ray R(4).

Author information:
(1)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, 
NC, 27709-3398, USA. beth.a.hahn@gsk.com.
(2)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, 
NC, 27709-3398, USA.
(3)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, Optum Life Sciences, 11000 Optum 
Circle, Eden Prairie, MN, 55344, USA.
(4)US Medical Affairs, GSK, 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
27709-3398, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Many patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
prescribed long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) monotherapy remain 
symptomatic. This multivariable analysis of a previously reported claims-linked, 
cross-sectional survey assessed symptom burden measured by the COPD assessment 
test (CAT) in patients treated with LAMA monotherapy.
METHODS: Eligible patients aged ≥ 40 years with COPD (≥ 2 International 
Classification of Diseases-10th Revision-Clinical Modification [ICD-10-CM] 
diagnosis codes ≥ 30 days apart during the 12-month baseline period) and ≥ 2 
claims for LAMA monotherapy in the latter half of the baseline period were 
identified using claims data from the Optum Research Database. Patients 
completed a survey and 7-day daily diary; baseline clinical characteristics and 
resource utilization were assessed from claims data. Association between symptom 
burden and baseline characteristics was assessed using generalized linear 
regression modeling with normal distribution and identity link.
RESULTS: Overall, 433 patients prescribed LAMA monotherapy with claims-linked 
survey and diary data were included in the analysis. Most patients (85.5%) had a 
mean CAT score ≥ 10; 39.0% had scores ≥ 21. Overall, the factors most related to 
a clinically meaningful increase in CAT score (≥ 2 points) were being diagnosed 
with COPD for > 5 years and being a current smoker (2.25 points, P = 0.003 and 
2.22 points, P = 0.025, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Results demonstrate that many patients with COPD receiving LAMA 
monotherapy remain symptomatic, especially those diagnosed > 5 years ago or 
those who continue to smoke. Use of patient-reported outcomes such as the CAT 
should be considered part of routine visits for patients with COPD.
FUNDING: GlaxoSmithKline (GSK study number 205862 [HO-16-16642]).

DOI: 10.1007/s41030-019-00098-1
PMCID: PMC6967173
PMID: 32026410


509. Ter Arkh. 2020 Apr 27;92(3):25-29. doi: 10.26442/00403660.2020.03.000422.

[The risk of bronchial asthma exacerbations among smokers with asthma-chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease overlap after inpatient treatment].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Gnoevykh VV(1), Smirnova AY(1), Shorokhova YA(1), Gening TP(1), Abakumova TV(1).

Author information:
(1)Ulyanovsk State University.

AIM: To assess the risk of exacerbations of bronchial asthma (BA) in smoking 
patients with the asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap 
(ACO) after inpatient treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 36 smokers with ACO (main group) and 36 non-smoking 
patients (control group) with severe or moderate exacerbation of bronchial 
asthma were examined. Assessment of the severity of exacerbation of BA before 
treatment, levels of control and risk of exacerbations of BA after treatment was 
determined according to the Federal clinical guidelines for the diagnosis and 
treatment of BA (2016). Spirometry, monitoring of blood oxygenation using 
transcutaneous spectral pulse oximetry and enzyme immunoassay for determination 
of matrix metalloproteinases 9 were performed. Smoking experience, smoking index 
and pack/years index were taken into account in patients with ACO. The 
carboxyhaemoglobin level was analyzed by the carbon monoxide fraction in the 
exhaled air.
RESULTS: For the first time in patients with the ACO, the ability of heavy 
tobacco smoking and associated decrease in blood oxygenation to potentiate the 
negative impact of other predictors on the risk of exacerbations of the 
underlying disease was revealed. In smoking patients with the ACO, for the first 
time, a direct association of higher levels of matrix metalloproteinases 9 
(measured before inpatient treatment) with such a predictor of the risk of 
further exacerbations of the disease as more frequent detection of symptoms of 
uncontrolled BA was revealed. In non-smoking patients with BA, a direct 
relationship between increased sputum secretion and eosinophilia of blood and/or 
sputum (a predictor of exacerbation of BA) and the relative duration of episodes 
of decreased blood oxygenation was established.
CONCLUSION: It was found that intensive and prolonged smoking increases the 
duration and reduces the effectiveness of inpatient treatment of patients with 
ACO, contributing to the preservation of air traps and low (forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second 60%) ventilation capacity of the lungs with the persistence 
of moderately reduced blood oxygenation; the risk of further exacerbations of BA 
in this phenotype of patients is significantly higher than in non-smoking 
patients with BA without combination with COPD.

Publisher: Цель. Оценить риск обострений бронхиальной астмы (БА) у курящих 
больных с сочетанием бронхиальной астмы и хронической обструктивной болезни 
легких (фенотип БА-ХОБЛ) после стационарного лечения. Материалы и методы. 
Выборку составили 36 курильщиков с фенотипом БА-ХОБЛ (основная группа) и 36 
некурящих пациентов (контрольная группа) с тяжелым или среднетяжелым обострением 
БА. Оценку тяжести обострения БА перед лечением, уровней контроля и риска 
обострений БА после лечения определяли согласно Федеральным клиническим 
рекомендациям по диагностике и лечению БА (2016 г.). Проводили спирометрию, 
мониторирование оксигенации крови с помощью транскутанной спектральной 
пульсоксиметрии и иммуноферментный анализ для определения матриксных 
металлопротеиназ 9. У больных с фенотипом БА-ХОБЛ учитывали стаж курения, индекс 
курящего человека и показатель пачко-лет. Уровень карбоксигемоглобина 
анализировали по фракции окиси углерода в выдыхаемом воздухе. Результаты. 
Впервые у больных с фенотипом БА-ХОБЛ выявлена способность злостного 
табакокурения и ассоциированного с ним снижения оксигенации крови потенцировать 
негативное влияние других предикторов на риск обострений основного заболевания. 
У курящих больных с фенотипом БА-ХОБЛ впервые выявлена прямая связь более 
высокого уровня матриксных металлопротеиназ 9 (измеренного до стационарного 
лечения) с таким предиктором риска дальнейших обострений обсуждаемого 
заболевания, как более частое выявление симптомов неконтролируемой БА. У 
некурящих больных БА установлена прямая связь повышенной секреции мокроты и 
эозинофилии крови и/или мокроты (предиктор обострения БА) с относительной 
продолжительностью эпизодов снижения оксигенации крови. Заключение. Установлено, 
что интенсивное и продолжительное курение повышает продолжительность и снижает 
эффективность стационарного лечения больных с фенотипом БА-ХОБЛ, способствуя 
сохранению воздушных ловушек и низкой (объем форсированного выдоха за 1-ю 
секунду менее 60%) вентиляционной способности легких с персистированием умеренно 
сниженной оксигенации крови; при этом риск дальнейших обострений БА у данного 
фенотипа пациентов достоверно выше, чем у некурящих больных БА без сочетания с 
ХОБЛ.

DOI: 10.26442/00403660.2020.03.000422
PMID: 32598789


510. N Engl J Med. 2019 Sep 12;381(11):1023-1034. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1905248. Epub 
2019 May 20.

Benralizumab for the Prevention of COPD Exacerbations.

Criner GJ(1), Celli BR(1), Brightling CE(1), Agusti A(1), Papi A(1), Singh D(1), 
Sin DD(1), Vogelmeier CF(1), Sciurba FC(1), Bafadhel M(1), Backer V(1), Kato 
M(1), Ramírez-Venegas A(1), Wei YF(1), Bjermer L(1), Shih VH(1), Jison M(1), 
O'Quinn S(1), Makulova N(1), Newbold P(1), Goldman M(1), Martin UJ(1); GALATHEA 
Study Investigators; TERRANOVA Study Investigators.

Collaborators: Burghuber O, Forstner B, Köberl G, Lamprecht B, Löffler-Ragg J, 
Olschewski H, Studnicka M, Beaucage F, Chouinard G, Dechant A, Dowell A, Hebert 
J, Khattak S, Killian K, Killorn W, Lam A, Maltais F, Marciniuk D, Melenka L, 
Pek B, Road J, Sin D, Vaugeois A, Walker B, Dvorak T, Holub S, Hokynar O, Kolek 
V, Kopecka D, Krepelka J, Mares J, Veverka J, Zindr V, Ballenberger S, Dichmann 
R, Geßner C, Jandl M, Keller C, Kirschner J, Kornmann M, Mikloweit P, Naudts I, 
Overlack A, Schenkenberger I, Schlegel V, Versen LV, Vogelmeier CF, Zielen S, 
Albert I, Bálint B, Hangonyi MC, Kecskés T, Kurucz A, Medgyasszay B, Molnár L, 
Mucsi J, Papp M, Póczi M, Radeczky É, Székely ZP, Szabó C, Szabó G, Szabó M, 
Chetta AA, Di Maria G, Donazzan G, Meloni F, Pace E, Paggiaro P, Papi A, Luigi 
F, Ricciardolo M, Spanevello A, Aoki F, Eda R, Endo T, Fukushima Y, Gemba K, 
Hagimoto N, Harada H, Harada Y, Hata N, Hataji O, Hatakeyama N, Horiguchi T, 
Ideura G, Iikura M, Ikegami A, Imokawa S, Inoue Y, Isobe T, Ito R, Iwata S, 
Kamei T, Kato M, Katsura H, Kawarada Y, Kihara N, Kinoshita M, Kinoshita T, 
Kishaba T, Kita H, Kiyosue A, Komatsu S, Konishi K, Koyama S, Kudo M, Machida K, 
Makita H, Matsuse H, Miyazawa N, Nakamura H, Nakatani Y, Nishimura K, Nishimura 
T, Ogawa J, Ohbayashi H, Ohdaira T, Ohnishi T, Oki K, Saito M, Sakamoto K, 
Sakamoto O, Sekino H, Shijubo N, Shinkai M, Soto H, Sugawara Y, Suko N, 
Takahashi H, Takahashi M, Takahashi T, Tanaka H, Taniguchi H, Terada T, Tochigi 
T, Tohyama K, Tokuyasu H, Tomii K, Tsuboi T, Utsugi M, Yamamoto K, Yamamoto M, 
Yano S, Yoshida M, Custers F, Dekhuijzen R, Djamin R, Van Dan Berg JW, 
Vanfleteren L, Wielders P, Cimoszko B, Doboszyńska A, Dyczek A, Fal A, Folcik K, 
Goliński Ł, Jutel M, Kolczyński A, Kuna P, Łączyńska E, Machowiak W, Marczak M, 
Markiewicz J, Milanowski J, Mincewicz G, Nittner-Marszalska M, Papiewski W, 
Pawlukiewicz M, Pomiećko W, Rewerska B, Rybacki C, Skucha W, Trębas-Pietraś E, 
Uhryn E, Żurowska-Gębala M, Andrei L, Mihaescu T, Mihaicuta S, Pall EV, Petrui 
I, Savu A, Toma C, Trailescu A, Abrosimov V, Astafyeva N, Bazdyrev E, Berdnikova 
N, Bolieva L, Bukreeva E, Chistyakov V, Galustyan A, Gantseva H, Goncharova S, 
Grigoriev S, Ignatova G, Ilyashevich I, Izmozherova N, Kamalov M, Khovaeva Y, 
Kuzubova N, Kvitkova L, Lenskaya L, Leshchenko I, Magnitskaya O, Molotilov B, 
Molotkov A, Myasoedova S, Nedogoda S, Nosov V, Osipenko M, Peskov A, Popova V, 
Ratushnay O, Ryzhova I, Shangina O, Shaporova N, Shmelev E, Shpagina L, Shutkin 
A, Shvarts Y, Smirnov M, Stitsenko I, Vasilev M, Vertkin A, Vishneva E, Vizel A, 
Zateyschikova A, Abdool-Gaffar M, Abdullah I, Bruning A, Fourie N, Greenblatt M, 
Tayob M, Venter K, Jang AS, Lee KH, Lee SH, Lee SY, Yong SJ, Yoo KH, Uh ST, 
Balbín RA, Barbón DR, García-Navarro ÁA, Velasco Garrido JL, Guardia SP, Molas 
EM, De Teresa Parreño L, García-Cosio Piqueras B, Peces-Barba Romero G, Rubio 
MC, Sánchez-Toril López F, Tapia AM, Braschler HM, Brutsche M, Grob M, Leuppi J, 
Stolz D, Turk A, Bakerley N, Bafadhel M, Brightling C, Chaudhuri R, Choudhury G, 
Devereux G, Hussain I, Lee K, MacNee W, Mahadeva R, Masoli M, Nordstrom M, Patel 
M, Reid A, Saralaya D, Sethi T, Singh SD, de Soyza AG, Wilkinson T, Turner A, 
Ward H, Abboy C, Ackerman I, Acosta I, Adlakha A, Aish B, Ali M, Andrews C, 
Ayoub R, Badhwar A, Bassetti D, El Bayadi S, Beasley R, Bellam S, Bernstein J, 
Blahey M, Bloom S, Bleecker E, Bray W, Brewer J, Buynak R, Calhoun W, Campbell 
E, Captain A, Chinoy B, Chinsky K, Chupp G, Columbie A, Corder C, Criner G, Cruz 
H, Cullen E, Deboer K, Denenberg M, Dransfield M, Dunn L, Elmore M, Erb D, Fakih 
F, Ferguson G, Fogarty C, Freed M, Fritz S, Fuentes D, Cohen-Gadol S, Garver R, 
Given J, Ramos Gonez L, Gonzalez RE, Gordon R, Gottschlich G, Graham D, Grant D, 
Greenwald G, Greenwald J, Haft K, Hammond G, Hansel N, Harris J, Hernandez H, 
Heuer M, Heyder A, Hill D, Holloway W, Ioachimescu O, Jackson R, Jain A, Jiang 
N, Kaelin T, Kaplan A, Kaye M, Khan A, Khronusova Y, Klein R, Kline J, Koura F, 
Kuno R, Kuschner W, Labissiere JC, Laman D Jr, Lee J, Lee M, Levinson L, Lugogo 
N, Mador M, Marchetti N, Martinez R, Martinez R, Mattar P, Maybee D, McGraw D, 
McGuire M, Mello C, Milstone A, Mitchell J, Moore W, Moriarty T, Nand C, Nevins 
B, Ndukwu I, Nisbet R, Nyanjom D, Nualart M, O'Brien T, Palatnik M, Patel G, 
Patel A, Perez G, Perry C, Pfeffer M, Pudi K, Raikhel M, Ramaswamy M, Ramsdell 
J, Ricci D, Richmond G, Ryan E, Saba F, Sagalovich B, Schroeder CA, Scialla T, 
Sciurba F, Shah A, Shah N, Shaikh Z, Siddiqui A, Sigal B, Siler T, Silverboard 
H, Sims W, Southwell C, Spangenthal S, Sriram P, Stocks J, Su T, Suen J, Sussman 
R, Tatu H, Terrelonge A, Thomas A, Torres M, Trejo R, Trevino M, Turner B, 
Villareal M, Vintch J, Warshoff N, Westerman J, Wexler P, Yunger T, Zeki A, 
Fernandez Acquier M, Aramayo N, Arce G, Belloni J, Cambursano V, De La Vega C, 
Rodriguez Chariarse F, Elias P, Fernández M, Lopez A, Medina A, Otaola M, 
Salazan Saez M, De Salvo M, Scherbovsky F, Stok A, Taborda J, Tolcachier A, 
Verra F, Victorio C, Delgado Vizcarra RG, Bardin P, Bremner P, Phillips M, Upham 
J, Wark P, Bolly A, Delobbe A, Driesen P, Janssens E, Janssens W, Michel O, 
Vandooren B, Antila M, Fiterman J, Fritscher C, Hetzel J, Jardim J, De Mattos W, 
Martins R, De Oliveira ME, Pez A, Sales M, Stelmach R, Wolff P, Andreeva S, 
Antonova R, Dancheva A, Ivanova Y, Ivanov S, Metev H, Naydenova I, Petkova T, 
Petrova G, Sotirova K, Stoyanova M, Tiholov R, Valkanova I, Yakov O, Feijoo R, 
Pavie J, Schönffeldt P, Silva A, Martinez V, Espinosa D, Londono A, Molina D, 
Prada G, Rico A, Sanchez Vallejo G, Urbina A, Vanegas A, Villegas M, Aralica J, 
Stjepanovic G, Backer V, Bødtger U, Meyer C, Nielsen LS, Ottesen AL, Titlestad 
I, Bautin N, Bourdin A, Chanez P, Couturaud F, Cuvelier A, Devouassoux G, 
Girodet PO, Muir JF, Pépin JL, Proust A, Yaici A, Adir Y, Fink G, Fridlender Z, 
Izbicki G, Kramer M, Schwartz Y, Moreno Hoyos Abril J, Campos Cerda R, Montaño 
Gonzalez E, Ramirez Terrones R, Posadas Valay R, Ramirez-Venegas A, Dawkins P, 
Hussain S, Brockway B, Richmond J, Helm C, Chang C, Ahlqvist J, Tollåli T, 
Tomala T, Castro S, Chavez W, Cubas O, Estrella R, Felix E, Gamarra R, Guerreros 
A, Matsuno A, Salazar D, Tsukayama M, Albay A Jr, Aquino T, Atienza T, Roque 
Gonong J, Samoro R, Santiaguel J, Asankowicz-Bargiel B, Pisarczyk-Bogacka E, 
Bijata-Bronisz R, Chełmińska M, Dobryniewska M, Olech-Cudzik A, Fijołek T, 
Filipek K, Kot A, Kucińska B, Lis K, Rybicka-Liszewska E, Tarnowska-Matusiak M, 
Mróz R, Napora P, Naumnik W, Niemiec A, Pierzchała W, Przybylski G, Styka K, 
Wrońska D, Milenkovic B, Novkovic D, Flezar M, Segota N, Ulcar Kostic S, 
Klobucar A, Bjermer L, Curiac D, Janson C, Koskinen P, Lundback B, Olsson Å, 
Cheng SL, Ho ML, Hsu JY, Hsu WH, Kuo PH, Wang CC, Wei YF, Yang KY, Boonsawat W, 
Chantarothorn S, Keeratichananont W, Maneechotesuwan K, Pipatvech K, Sangsayunh 
P, Arinc S, Borekci S, Erturk AK, Kosar F, Gunen H, Hanta I, Kabalak PA, Demir 
TA, Nayci S, Ozkan SA, Sayiner A, Uzaslan E, Blazhko V, Gavrysyuk V, Golub O, 
Iashyna L, Ilashchuk T, Koshlia V, Krakhmalova O, Kryvenko V, Kuryk L, Levchenko 
O, Mostovoy Y, Ostrovskyy M, Pertseva T, Piura O, Rudnytska N, Stupnytska G, 
Velychko N, Yakovenko O, Rodriguez Ables L, Abrahams R, Aish B, Alvarez J, 
Arencibia F, Arora C, Arora S, Averill F, Ayesu K, Basheda S, Bauer S, Bautista 
J, Beacom M, Beasley R, Bernal H, Bhuchar S, Bitters J, Burk J, Burkett E, Cain 
J, Call R, Chappel C, Celli B, Christensen T, Cole J, Daniel J, Dang N, Davis E, 
Deleon S, DeLuca R, Diaz E, DiMarco A, Dixon C, Doshi A, Durrence H, Eid A, 
Elsen J, Fleming H, Flores M, Fogarty C, Franczek S, Fritz S, Funk G, Garay S, 
Garcia B, Ramos Gonez L, Gottschlich G, Graif J, Griffin C, Duardo Guerra Y, 
Headley D, Hewitt M, Hole S, Holladay R, Horowitz I, Hsu YL, Ilowite J, Jones S, 
Kashyap R, Kerwin E, Khan A, Kimzey N, Krainson J, Kreutter F, Krishnaswamy K, 
Kureishy S, Lai A, Lechin A, Lee D, Lee M, Leeds W, Lillo J, Lisberg E, Madoff 
L, Maheskwari N, Majumder M, Makam S, Mapel D, Mardiney M, Martin J, Maybee D, 
Melamed I, Mendez E, Millstone S, Montes J, Morrow L, Murphy F, Obeid D, Occy F, 
Oguchi G, Ortiz J, Padron F, Paine W, Pearle J, Pelayo E, Perez V, Pham D, 
Piniella C, Pritchett K, Rastogi P, Ryan S, Rehman S, Rhudy J, Riley E, Riser J, 
Risk C, Robinette E, Roney C, Ruoff G, Russian D, Samson M, Sandberg J, Santiago 
J, Sargeant W, Schecter A, Sciurba F, Scott J, Segal I, Sehgal S, Seifer F, 
Sekhsaria S, Sellman R, Shapero P, Shea J, Sher L, Sibille J, Siddiqui J, Sims 
W, Singh T, Sinkowitz D, Smyth D, Soteres D, Sousa D, Steele R, Stern T, Suarez 
J, Surdulescu S, Tan R, Tanus T, Tidman R, Torres-Consuegra A, Troyan B, 
Updegrove J, Vadgama S, Pineda-Velez A, Viera E, Wachtel A, Wade R, Wang J, 
Webster D, Weinberg P, Wells T, White J, Wieskopf B, Windom H, Wright P, Wyatt 
D, Yousef B, Zafar Z, Ngo C, Le H, Nguyen L, Nguyen T, Nguyen N.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Lewis Katz School of 
Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia (G.J.C.); Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston (B.R.C.); 
the Institute for Lung Health, Leicester National Institute for Health Research 
Biomedical Research Centre, Department of Respiratory Sciences, University of 
Leicester, Leicester (C.E.B.), the University of Manchester, Manchester 
University NHS Hospital Trust, Manchester (D.S.), and the Respiratory Medicine 
Unit, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford (M.B.) - all 
in the United Kingdom; Respiratory Institute, Hospital Clinic, University of 
Barcelona, Institut D'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red (CIBER) Enfermedades Respiratorias, 
Barcelona (A.A.); the Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy (A.P.); the Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, St. Paul's 
Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada (D.D.S.); the Department of Medicine, Pulmonary 
and Critical Care Medicine, University Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, 
Philipps-Universität Marburg, German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, 
Germany (C.F.V.); University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh 
(F.C.S.); the Department of Respiratory Medicine, Bispebjerg University 
Hospital, Copenhagen (V.B.); Kishiwada City Hospital, Osaka, Japan (M.K.); the 
Departamento de Investigación en Tabaquismo y EPOC, Instituto Nacional de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias, Ismael Cosio Villegas, Mexico City (A.R.-V.); the 
Division of Respiratory and Chest Medicine, E-Da Hospital and I-Shou University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan (Y.-F.W.); the Department of Respiratory Medicine and 
Allergology, Skane University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden (L.B.); 
and AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD (V.H.S., M.J., S.O., N.M., P.N., M.G., 
U.J.M.).

BACKGROUND: The efficacy and safety of benralizumab, an interleukin-5 receptor 
alpha-directed cytolytic monoclonal antibody, for the prevention of 
exacerbations in patients with moderate to very severe chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) are not known.
METHODS: In the GALATHEA and TERRANOVA trials, we enrolled patients with COPD 
(at a ratio of approximately 2:1 on the basis of eosinophil count [≥220 per 
cubic millimeter vs. <220 per cubic millimeter]) who had frequent exacerbations 
despite receiving guideline-based inhaled treatment. Patients were randomly 
assigned to receive benralizumab (30 or 100 mg in GALATHEA; 10, 30, or 100 mg in 
TERRANOVA) every 8 weeks (every 4 weeks for the first three doses) or placebo. 
The primary end point was the treatment effect of benralizumab, measured as the 
annualized COPD exacerbation rate ratio (benralizumab vs. placebo) at week 56 in 
patients with baseline blood eosinophil counts of 220 per cubic millimeter or 
greater. Safety was also assessed.
RESULTS: In GALATHEA, the estimates of the annualized exacerbation rate were 
1.19 per year (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.04 to 1.36) in the 30-mg 
benralizumab group, 1.03 per year (95% CI, 0.90 to 1.19) in the 100-mg 
benralizumab group, and 1.24 per year (95% CI, 1.08 to 1.42) in the placebo 
group; the rate ratio as compared with placebo was 0.96 for 30 mg of 
benralizumab (P = 0.65) and 0.83 for 100 mg of benralizumab (P = 0.05). In 
TERRANOVA, the estimates of the annualized exacerbation rate for 10 mg, 30 mg, 
and 100 mg of benralizumab and for placebo were 0.99 per year (95% CI, 0.87 to 
1.13), 1.21 per year (95% CI, 1.08 to 1.37), 1.09 per year (95% CI, 0.96 to 
1.23), and 1.17 per year (95% CI, 1.04 to 1.32), respectively; the corresponding 
rate ratios were 0.85 (P = 0.06), 1.04 (P = 0.66), and 0.93 (P = 0.40). At 56 
weeks, none of the annualized COPD exacerbation rate ratios for any dose of 
benralizumab as compared with placebo reached significance in either trial. 
Types and frequencies of adverse events were similar with benralizumab and 
placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Add-on benralizumab was not associated with a lower annualized rate 
of COPD exacerbations than placebo among patients with moderate to very severe 
COPD, a history of frequent moderate or severe exacerbations, and blood 
eosinophil counts of 220 per cubic millimeter or greater (Funded by AstraZeneca 
[GALATHEA and TERRANOVA] and Kyowa Hakko Kirin [GALATHEA]; GALATHEA and 
TERRANOVA ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT02138916 and NCT02155660.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1905248
PMID: 31112385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


511. Am J Case Rep. 2019 Jun 11;20:822-827. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.915402.

10-Year Follow-Up of Frequently Relapsed Chronic Eosinophilic Pneumonia Starting 
at 15 Years Old; Attempts to Treat with Inhaled Corticosteroid (A Case Report).

Murayama N(1), Doi S(2), Kameda M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Murayama Pediatrics, Osaka City, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Education, Shitennouji University, Osaka City, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka Habikino Medical Center, Osaka City, Osaka, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND Eosinophilic pneumonia is recognized both as an eosinophil-associated 
disease and as bronchial asthma. In eosinophilic pneumonia, the site of 
eosinophilic infiltration is mainly the alveolus and the peripheral airway; the 
disability of pulmonary function is restrictive, as opposed to from bronchial 
asthma, which has a relatively central side bronchus region and obstructive 
function. Differences in inflammatory region and the activation degree of T-cell 
and eosinophil parameters were predicted. CASE REPORT To determine the extent of 
inflammation and the region showing the inflammation in eosinophilic pneumonia, 
parameters like HLADRCD4/CD4 (%), CD25CD4/CD4 (%), ECP, soluble IL2R, and IL5 
were examined in BALF and in peripheral blood during the active phase and 
remission phase. The percentage of HLADRCD4/CD4, IL-5, and the percentage of 
CD25CD4/CD4 were extremely high during the acute phase in BALF as compared to 
that in peripheral blood during the active and the remission phase. To avoid the 
adverse effects of systemic administration of steroids, we tried 5 different 
kinds of steroid through inhalation. We used%FVC by spirometry as a parameter to 
determine the recurrence of the disease. However, the inhaled steroids could not 
control the remission for long. This is the first report in which frequent 
recurrence of the disease was seen despite treatments and in which%FVC was used 
to determine the disease condition. CONCLUSIONS The principle site of 
inflammation in eosinophilic pneumonia is the peripheral bronchus and the 
alveolar area. Percent FVC can be a useful parameter for assessment of 
recurrence of the disease. In the present case, the disease could not be kept 
under control despite treatment with 5 different steroids through the inhalation 
route.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.915402
PMCID: PMC6581014
PMID: 31182706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared Conflict of 
interest None.


512. J Thorac Dis. 2019 Jun;11(6):2490-2497. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2019.05.50.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations and progression in relation 
to ambient air pollutants exposure.

Doneva M(1), Petrova G(1), Petrova D(2), Kamusheva M(1), Petkova V(1), Tachkov 
K(1), Pencheva V(2), Georgiev O(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(2)UMBAL "Alexandrovska", Department of Propaedeutic of Internal Medicine, 
Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.

BACKGROUND: The information for the impact of air pollutants on the severity of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and hospital admissions in Bulgaria 
is scarce. The aim of the study is to assess the relationship between some 
ambient air pollution and exacerbations levels as well as hospital admissions of 
patients with COPD in Bulgaria.
METHODS: A multi-center, prospective, one-year observational study was conducted 
among 426 COPD patients. Data from pollution monitoring are collected from the 
Executive Environment Agency (EEA).
RESULTS: The results showed that the pollution with sulfur dioxide (SO2) is less 
than limit concentrations recommended by the European Union and World Health 
Organization (WHO), while the pollution with PM exceeds limits values of WHO two 
times. The mean rate of exacerbations in selected towns are between 0.5-3, the 
number of exacerbations with hospitalization are between 0.2-1.8 and length of 
hospital stay is between 1-14 days.
CONCLUSIONS: The study confirms that air pollution leads to increased number of 
exacerbations and hospital stay. The patients with mild level of COPD have 0.86 
exacerbations and 2.61 days in hospital per year, while in case of very severe 
COPD these values increase 4 times. Outside pollutions lead to worsening of the 
disease severity and hospitalizations due to a higher rate of COPD 
exacerbations.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.05.50
PMCID: PMC6626810
PMID: 31372286

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.


513. Chest. 2019 Jan;155(1):69-78. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.10.044.

Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccination on Hospitalizations and Risk Factors for 
Severe Outcomes in Hospitalized Patients With COPD.

Mulpuru S(1), Li L(2), Ye L(2), Hatchette T(2), Andrew MK(2), Ambrose A(2), 
Boivin G(3), Bowie W(4), Chit A(5), Dos Santos G(6), ElSherif M(2), Green K(7), 
Haguinet F(8), Halperin SA(2), Ibarguchi B(9), Johnstone J(10), Katz K(11), 
Langley JM(2), LeBlanc J(2), Loeb M(12), MacKinnon-Cameron D(2), McCarthy A(13), 
McElhaney JE(14), McGeer A(7), Powis J(15), Richardson D(16), Semret M(17), 
Shinde V(18), Smyth D(19), Trottier S(3), Valiquette L(20), Webster D(21), 
McNeil SA(2); Serious Outcomes Surveillance (SOS) Network of the Canadian 
Immunization Research Network (CIRN).

Collaborators: Lagace-Wiens P, Light B, Poirier A, Smith S, Taylor G.

Author information:
(1)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Clinical Epidemiology Program, University 
of Ottawa, ON, Canada. Electronic address: smulpuru@toh.ca.
(2)Canadian Center for Vaccinology, IWK Health Centre and Nova Scotia Health 
Authority, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(3)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Quebec, QC, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(5)Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater, PA; Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Business & Decision Life Sciences, Brussels, Belgium (GlaxoSmithKline).
(7)Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)GlaxoSmithKline, Wavre, Belgium.
(9)GlaxoSmithKline, Mississauga, ON, Canada.
(10)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(11)North York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(12)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pathology and Molecular 
Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(13)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Clinical Epidemiology Program, 
University of Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(14)Health Sciences North Research Institute, Sudbury, ON, Canada.
(15)Toronto East General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(16)William Osler Health System, Brampton, ON, Canada.
(17)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of 
Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(18)GlaxoSmithKline, King of Prussia, PA.
(19)The Moncton Hospital, Moncton, NB, Canada.
(20)Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.
(21)Horizon Health, Saint John, NB, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The effectiveness of influenza vaccination in reducing 
influenza-related hospitalizations among patients with COPD is not well 
described, and influenza vaccination uptake remains suboptimal.
METHODS: Data were analyzed from a national, prospective, multicenter cohort 
study including patients with COPD, hospitalized with any acute respiratory 
illness or exacerbation between 2011 and 2015. All patients underwent 
nasopharyngeal swab screening with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for 
influenza. The primary outcome was an influenza-related hospitalization. We 
identified influenza-positive cases and negative control subjects and used 
multivariable logistic regression with a standard test-negative design to 
estimate the vaccine effectiveness for preventing influenza-related 
hospitalizations.
RESULTS: Among 4,755 hospitalized patients with COPD, 4,198 (88.3%) patients 
with known vaccination status were analyzed. The adjusted analysis showed a 
38% reduction in influenza-related hospitalizations in vaccinated 
vs unvaccinated individuals. Influenza-positive patients (n = 1,833 [38.5%]) 
experienced higher crude mortality (9.7% vs 7.9%; P = .047) and critical illness 
(17.2% vs 12.1%; P < .001) compared with influenza-negative patients. Risk 
factors for mortality in influenza-positive patients included age > 75 years 
(OR, 3.7 [95% CI, 0.4-30.3]), cardiac comorbidity (OR, 2.0 [95% CI, 1.3-3.2]), 
residence in long-term care (OR, 2.6 [95% CI, 1.5-4.5]), and home oxygen use 
(OR, 2.9 [95% CI, 1.6-5.1]).
CONCLUSIONS: Influenza vaccination significantly reduced influenza-related 
hospitalization among patients with COPD. Initiatives to increase vaccination 
uptake and early use of antiviral agents among patients with COPD could reduce 
influenza-related hospitalization and critical illness and improve health-care 
costs in this vulnerable population.
TRIAL REGISTRY: ClinicalTrials.govNo.:NCT01517191; URL www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Copyright © 2018 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2018.10.044
PMID: 30616737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


514. Ter Arkh. 2020 May 19;92(4):57-63. doi: 10.26442/00403660.2020.04.000590.

[Clinical efficacy of mechanical bacterial lysate in the prevention of 
infectious exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Avdeev SN(1)(2), Nuralieva GS(1)(2), Gainitdinova VV(1), Baimakanova GE(3), So 
AK(4), Merzhoeva ZM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov University).
(2)Scientific Research Institute of Pulmonology.
(3)Loginov Moscow Clinical Scientific Center.
(4)Military Medical Academy.

AIM: To evaluate the efficacy of mechanical bacterial lysate on the prevention 
of infectious exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in patients 
with frequent exacerbations.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study included patients (n=60) with frequent 
exacerbations of COPD (groups C and D according to the GOLD classification). All 
COPD patients were divided into two groups by blind method. The first group 
(n=30) received conventional therapy for COPD plus MBL (the course included 3 
cycles of 10 days therapy with 20-day intervals between them). The second group 
of patients (control, n=30) received conventional therapy for COPD without 
MBL.We evaluated the severity of symptoms, frequency of recurrence of COPD 
exacerbations, readmissions, need for emergency care and changes in basic 
therapy of COPD. Evaluations were done on 10 days, 1, 3 and 6 months from the 
start of the study.
RESULTS: Adding of MBL to the therapy list of COPD resulted in a significant 
decrease of biomarkers of systemic inflammation and sputum purulence during 
compared to the control group. After 6 months of observation MBL group 
demonstrated statistically significant improvement of respiratory function, 
decrease in frequency of COPD exacerbations, needs for emergency medical 
service, reduced changes in basic therapy and hospitalization for exacerbation 
of COPD. Therapy with MBL showed a high degree of safety and low incidence of 
adverse events.
CONCLUSION: The results of the study indicate that MBL may be used for the 
prevention of severe infectious exacerbations of COPD.

Publisher: Цель. Изучить влияние поливалентного механического бактериального 
лизата (ПМБЛ) на снижение общего числа инфекционных обострений хронической 
обструктивной болезни легких (ХОБЛ) у пациентов с частыми обострениями в 
анамнезе. Материалы и методы. В исследование включены больные (n=60) с частыми 
обострениями ХОБЛ (в возрасте 40 лет, группы C и D по классификации GOLD). Все 
пациенты слепым методом разделены на две группы. Первая группа пациентов (n=30) 
получала ПМБЛ (курс включал 3 цикла по 10 дней с 20-дневными интервалами между 
ними). Вторая группа пациентов (контроль, n=30) получала комплексную терапию 
ХОБЛ без иммуностимуляторов. Наблюдение осуществлялось через 10 дней, 1, 3 и 6 
мес от начала исследования. Оценивались выраженность симптомов, частота 
рецидивов обострений ХОБЛ, повторных госпитализаций, вызовов скорой медицинской 
помощи; изменения в базовой схеме терапии ХОБЛ. Результаты. Включение ПМБЛ в 
стандартную терапию ХОБЛ привело к статистически значимому уменьшению 
выраженности клинических проявлений, уровня маркеров системного воспаления, 
объема и степени гнойности мокроты во время обострений и в течение 6 мес после 
обострения по сравнению с группой контроля. Через 6 мес наблюдения в группе 
больных, получавших ПМБЛ, отмечались статистически значимое улучшение функции 
внешнего дыхания, снижение частоты повторных обострений, вызовов скорой 
медицинской помощи по поводу обострения ХОБЛ, изменений проводимой базисной 
терапии и госпитализаций по поводу обострения ХОБЛ. Препарат показал высокую 
степень безопасности и низкую частоту нежелательных явлений. Заключение. 
Результаты проведенного исследования свидетельствуют о целесообразности 
клинического применения ПМБЛ для профилактики тяжелых инфекционных обострений 
ХОБЛ.

DOI: 10.26442/00403660.2020.04.000590
PMID: 32598699


515. Adv Ther. 2020 May 27. doi: 10.1007/s12325-020-01373-3. Online ahead of print.

Benefits of Tiotropium/Olodaterol Compared with Tiotropium in Patients with COPD 
Receiving only LAMA at Baseline: Pooled Analysis of the TONADO(®) and OTEMTO(®) 
Studies.

Buhl R(1), Singh D(2), de la Hoz A(3), Xue W(4), Ferguson GT(5).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Department, Johannes Gutenberg University Hospital, Mainz, Germany. 
Roland.Buhl@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(2)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester University 
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Ridgefield, CT, USA.
(5)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 
strategy report recommends long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) or 
long-acting β2-agonists (LABA) as first-line treatment for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), but many patients remain symptomatic on monotherapy 
and escalation to dual-bronchodilator therapy may be warranted.
METHODS: TONADO® 1&2 and OTEMTO® 1&2 assessed lung function and patient-reported 
outcomes in patients with moderate-to-severe (OTEMTO) or moderate-to-very-severe 
(TONADO) COPD. This pooled post hoc analysis included patients treated with LAMA 
monotherapy at baseline who were randomised to receive either 5 µg tiotropium 
(LAMA) or 5/5 µg tiotropium/olodaterol (LAMA/LABA). We assessed changes from 
baseline and responder rates for trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), 
St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) and the Transition Dyspnoea Index 
(TDI).
RESULTS: Overall, 151 patients received tiotropium; 148 received 
tiotropium/olodaterol. Mean differences from baseline with tiotropium/olodaterol 
versus tiotropium were + 0.074 l (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.033, 0.115; 
P = 0.0004) for trough FEV1, - 2.675 (95% CI - 5.060, - 0.291; P = 0.0280) for 
SGRQ and 1.148 (95% CI 0.564, 1.732; P = 0.0001) for TDI. Patients were more 
likely to respond when treated with tiotropium/olodaterol versus tiotropium for 
trough FEV1 (odds ratio [OR] 3.14, 95% CI 1.94, 5.06; P < 0.0001), SGRQ (OR 
1.49, 95% CI 0.93, 2.40; P = 0.0980) and TDI (OR 2.81, 95% CI 1.71, 4.60; 
P < 0.0001). Minimum clinically important difference from baseline in any of the 
analysed outcomes (FEV1 ≥ 0.1 l, SGRQ ≥ 4.0 points or TDI ≥ 1.0 point) was more 
likely in patients treated with tiotropium/olodaterol versus tiotropium (OR 
2.43, 95% CI 1.32, 4.51; P = 0.0046).
CONCLUSION: In patients with COPD receiving only LAMA monotherapy, treatment 
escalation to tiotropium/olodaterol resulted in statistically significant and 
clinically relevant improvements in lung function, health status and 
breathlessness. These results support early therapy optimisation to dual 
bronchodilation with tiotropium/olodaterol in patients receiving tiotropium 
alone.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: TONADO® 1 was registered in the US National Library of 
Medicine on 9 September 2011 (Clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01431274). TONADO® 2 was 
registered in the US National Library of Medicine on 9 September 2011 
(Clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01431287). OTEMTO® 1 was registered in the US National 
Library of Medicine on 17 October 2013 (Clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01964352). 
OTEMTO® 2 was registered in the US National Library of Medicine on 10 December 
2013 (Clinicaltrials.gov: NCT02006732).

Plain Language Summary: Global recommendations suggest that people with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) can start treatment with one of two types 
of inhaled medicine: either a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) or a 
long-acting β2-agonist (LABA). Doctors can also prescribe these treatments 
together (LAMA/LABA) if needed. To help doctors decide whether to prescribe 
single or combined treatment, we looked at people with COPD who were taking LAMA 
alone at the beginning of two large studies (TONADO® and OTEMTO®). In these 
studies, people with COPD could either stay on LAMA alone (tiotropium) or switch 
to combined LAMA/LABA treatment (tiotropium/olodaterol). We looked to see if 
there were any changes in the functioning of the lungs (measured using forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s), quality of life (measured using the St. George’s 
Respiratory Questionnaire) or breathlessness (measured using the Transition 
Dyspnoea Index) between the start of the study and after 12 weeks of treatment. 
We showed that lung function, health-related quality of life and breathlessness 
were significantly better in people taking tiotropium/olodaterol for 12 weeks 
compared with those on tiotropium alone. Overall, our results support global 
recommendations and suggest that many people with COPD who are treated with 
tiotropium could benefit from stepping up to tiotropium/olodaterol.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-020-01373-3
PMID: 32462607


516. J Clin Med. 2019 Nov 1;8(11):1835. doi: 10.3390/jcm8111835.

β(2)-Adrenergic Receptor (ADRB2) Gene Polymorphisms and Risk of COPD 
Exacerbations: The Rotterdam Study.

Karimi L(1), Lahousse L(2)(3), Ghanbari M(4)(5), Terzikhan N(6)(7), Uitterlinden 
AG(8), van der Lei J(9), Brusselle GG(10)(11)(12), Stricker BH(13)(14), Verhamme 
KMC(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Doctor 
Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. l.karimi@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Bioanalysis, Ghent University, Ottergemsesteenweg 460, 9000 
Ghent, Belgium. lies.lahousse@ugent.be.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Doctor 
Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. lies.lahousse@ugent.be.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Doctor 
Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.ghanbari@erasmusmc.nl.
(5)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical 
Science, 9177899191 Mashhad, Iran. m.ghanbari@erasmusmc.nl.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Doctor 
Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. n.terzikhan@erasmusmc.nl.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Corneel 
Heymanslaan 10, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. n.terzikhan@erasmusmc.nl.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, Doctor 
Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
a.g.uitterlinden@erasmusmc.nl.
(9)Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Doctor 
Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. j.vanderlei@erasmusmc.nl.
(10)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Doctor 
Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Guy.Brusselle@uzgent.be.
(11)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Corneel 
Heymanslaan 10, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. Guy.Brusselle@uzgent.be.
(12)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Doctor Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
Guy.Brusselle@uzgent.be.
(13)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Doctor 
Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. b.stricker@erasmusmc.nl.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, Doctor 
Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. b.stricker@erasmusmc.nl.
(15)Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Doctor 
Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. k.verhamme@erasmusmc.nl.
(16)Department of Bioanalysis, Ghent University, Ottergemsesteenweg 460, 9000 
Ghent, Belgium. k.verhamme@erasmusmc.nl.

The role of the β2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) gene in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is unclear. We investigated the association 
between ADRB2 variants and the risk of exacerbations in COPD patients treated 
with inhaled β2-agonists. Within the Rotterdam Study, a population-based cohort 
study, we followed 1,053 COPD patients until the first COPD exacerbation or end 
of follow-up and extracted rs1042713 (16Arg > Gly) and rs1042714 (27Gln > Glu) 
in ADRB2. Exposure to inhaled β2-agonists was categorised into current, past or 
non-use on the index date (date of COPD exacerbation for cases and on the same 
day of follow-up for controls). COPD exacerbations were defined as acute 
episodes of worsening symptoms requiring systemic corticosteroids and/or 
antibiotics (moderate exacerbations), or hospitalization (severe exacerbations). 
The associations between ADRB2 variants and COPD exacerbations were assessed 
using Cox proportional hazards models, adjusting for age, sex, use of inhaled 
corticosteroids, daily dose of β2-agonists, and smoking. In current users of 
β2-agonists, the risk of COPD exacerbation decreased by 30% (hazard ratio (HR); 
0.70, 95% CI: 0.59-0.84) for each copy of the Arg allele of rs1042713 and by 20% 
(HR; 0.80, 95% CI: 0.69-0.94) for each copy of the Gln allele of rs1042714. 
Furthermore, current users carrying the Arg16/Gln27 haplotype had a 
significantly lower risk (HR; 0.70, 95% CI: 0.59-0.85) of COPD exacerbation 
compared to the Gly16/Glu27 haplotype. In conclusion, we observed that the 
Arg16/Gln27 haplotype in ADRB2 was associated with a reduced risk of COPD 
exacerbation in current users of inhaled β2-agonists.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm8111835
PMCID: PMC6912270
PMID: 31683975

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest 
related to this manuscript.


517. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Feb;60:101870. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101870. Epub 
2019 Nov 27.

C-reactive protein as a biomarker of response to inhaled corticosteroids among 
patients with COPD.

Oshagbemi OA(1), Franssen FME(2), Wouters EFM(3), Maitland-van der Zee AH(4), 
Driessen JHM(5), de Boer A(6), de Vries F(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Toxicology, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre, Maastricht, the Netherlands; Cardiovascular Research Institute 
Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, the Netherlands; Division of 
Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, the Netherlands; CIRO, Horn, the Netherlands; 
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre 
(MUMC+), Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Epidemiology, Care and 
Public Health Research Institute (CAPHRI), Maastricht University, the 
Netherlands.
(2)CIRO, Horn, the Netherlands; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht 
University Medical Centre (MUMC+), Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(3)CIRO, Horn, the Netherlands; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht 
University Medical Centre (MUMC+), Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of 
Epidemiology, Care and Public Health Research Institute (CAPHRI), Maastricht 
University, the Netherlands.
(4)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Department of Respiratory 
Medicine, Academic University Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam (UvA) 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Toxicology, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre, Maastricht, the Netherlands; Cardiovascular Research Institute 
Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, the Netherlands; Division of 
Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(6)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Toxicology, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre, Maastricht, the Netherlands; Cardiovascular Research Institute 
Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, the Netherlands; Division of 
Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
f.devries@uu.nl.

AIMS: C-reactive protein (CRP) is an important biomarker in systemic 
inflammation in COPD; reports have suggested inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) 
attenuate CRP levels. We evaluated the risk of moderate-to-severe exacerbations, 
severe exacerbations and all-cause mortality among patients with COPD currently 
exposed to Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) stratified by CRP levels compared to 
never ICS users with low CRP levels.
METHODS: We included subjects age 40 or more who had a diagnosis of COPD from 
January 1, 2005 to January 31, 2014 from the UK Clinical Practice Research 
Datalink (CPRD). ICS exposure was determined time-dependently, as current, 
recent, past or never users. We evaluated the risk of moderate-to-severe 
exacerbations, severe exacerbations and all-cause mortality among ICS users 
stratified by CRP levels.
RESULTS: 17,722 subjects diagnosed with COPD met the inclusion criteria. Among 
current or never ICS with elevated CRP levels we found, no significantly reduced 
risk of moderate-to-severe or severe exacerbations. For patients currently 
exposed ICS with CRP levels ≥8 mg/L there was no reduced risk of 
moderate-to-severe exacerbations (adjusted hazard ratio [adj. HR] 0.99; 95% 
confidence interval [CI] 0.76-1.31) or severe exacerbations (adj.HR 1.52; 95% CI 
0.71-3.27). However, we found an increased risk of all-cause mortality among 
COPD patients with CRP levels ≥8 mg/L irrespective of ICS exposure.
CONCLUSION: We did not find a reduced risk of moderate and/or severe COPD 
exacerbations among COPD patients with varying CRP levels currently exposed to 
ICS. However, low-grade systemic inflammation was associated with all-cause 
mortality among COPD patients.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101870
PMID: 31785343


518. Respir Res. 2020 May 25;21(1):128. doi: 10.1186/s12931-020-01388-y.

Benefits of glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI) in 
improving lung function and reducing exacerbations in patients with 
moderate-to-very severe COPD: a pooled analysis of the PINNACLE studies.

Martinez FJ(1), Lipworth BJ(2), Rabe KF(3), Collier DJ(4), Ferguson GT(5), Sethi 
S(6), Feldman GJ(7), O'Brien G(8), Jenkins M(9), Reisner C(10).

Author information:
(1)Weill Cornell Medical College, New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell 
Medical Center, 525 E 68th St, Room M-522, Box 130, New York, NY, 10065, USA. 
fjm2003@med.cornell.edu.
(2)Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, Ninewells Hospital, University of 
Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK.
(3)LungenClinic Grosshansdorf and Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Airway 
Research Center North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Kiel, Germany.
(4)William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(5)Pulmonary Research Institute of Southeast Michigan, Farmington Hills, MI, 
USA.
(6)University at Buffalo, SUNY, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(7)S. Carolina Pharmaceutical Research, Spartanburg, SC, USA.
(8)formerly of AstraZeneca, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(9)AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(10)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Phase III PINNACLE studies assessed the efficacy and safety of 
glycopyrrolate/formoterol fumarate metered dose inhaler (GFF MDI), a dual 
long-acting bronchodilator for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Here we present a pre-specified pooled analysis of PINNACLE-1, PINNACLE-2, and 
PINNACLE-4.
METHODS: PINNACLE-1, -2, and -4 were multicenter, double-blind, randomized 
controlled trials that enrolled patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD, with 
no requirement for exacerbation history or a high symptom burden. Patients 
received GFF MDI 18/9.6 μg, glycopyrrolate (GP) MDI 18 μg, formoterol fumarate 
(FF) MDI 9.6 μg, or placebo MDI, twice-daily for 24 weeks. The primary endpoint 
of the pooled analysis was the change from baseline in morning pre-dose trough 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) at week 24. Secondary endpoints included 
COPD exacerbations and clinically important deterioration (CID). Adverse events 
were also assessed.
RESULTS: The pooled intent-to-treat population included 4983 patients; of these, 
61.9% had a COPD assessment test (CAT) score ≥15, and 25.0% had experienced ≥1 
moderate/severe exacerbation in the past year. At week 24, GFF MDI improved 
morning pre-dose trough FEV1 versus GP MDI (least squares mean [LSM] difference 
[95% confidence interval (CI)]: 59 mL [43, 75]), FF MDI (65 mL [48, 81]), and 
placebo MDI (146 mL [125, 166]); all p < 0.0001. GFF MDI reduced the risk of a 
moderate/severe exacerbation by 18% (p = 0.0168), 15% (p = 0.0628), and 28% 
(p = 0.0012) compared with GP MDI, FF MDI, and placebo MDI, respectively. In 
general, exacerbation risk reduction with GFF MDI versus comparators was greater 
in subgroups of symptomatic patients (CAT ≥15) and those who had an exacerbation 
history, than in the pooled intent-to-treat population. The risk of CID was also 
lower with GFF MDI versus GP MDI (23% decrease), FF MDI (17%), and placebo MDI 
(49%); all p < 0.0001. All treatments were well tolerated, with no unexpected 
safety signals.
CONCLUSIONS: This pooled analysis of the PINNACLE studies demonstrated that GFF 
MDI improved lung function and reduced the risk of exacerbations compared with 
monocomponents and placebo in patients with COPD. Exacerbation reductions with 
GFF MDI versus comparators were generally greater in patients with higher 
symptom burden and those with exacerbation history.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01854645, NCT01854658, and 
NCT02343458. Registered 13 May 2013 (NCT01854645, NCT01854658) and 6 January 
2015 (NCT02343458).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-020-01388-y
PMCID: PMC7249639
PMID: 32450869

Conflict of interest statement: FJM reports grants from AstraZeneca during the 
conduct of the study; personal fees and non-financial support from American 
College of Chest Physicians, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Concert, 
Continuing Education, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Inova Fairfax Health System, 
Miller Communications, National Association for Continuing Education, Novartis, 
Pearl – a member of the AstraZeneca Group, PeerView Communications, Prime 
Communications, Puerto Rican Respiratory Society, Roche, Sunovion, and 
Theravance; non-financial support from ProterixBio; personal fees from American 
Thoracic Society, Columbia University, Haymarket Communications, Integritas, 
inThought Research, MD Magazine, Methodist Hospital Brooklyn, New York 
University, Unity, UpToDate, WebMD/MedScape, and Western Connecticut Health 
Network; and grants from National Institutes of Health, outside of the submitted 
work. BJL is one of several co-investigators on an AstraZeneca-sponsored grant 
received by the University of Dundee to support genomic studies in COPD and an 
investigator-initiated grant from AstraZeneca. He has also received speaker fees 
and consulting fees from AstraZeneca; payment for consulting and speaking from 
Boehringer Ingelheim and Chiesi; grant support from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Mylan, and Janssen; advisory board and speaker fees from Teva; and 
consulting fees from Cipla, Dr. Reddys, Genentech, Glenmark, Lupin, Novartis, 
Sandoz, and Sanofi. KFR reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, Berlin-Chemie, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi Pharmaceuticals, InterMune, Novartis, Sanofi, and 
Teva; and grants from Ministry of Education and Science, Germany, outside of the 
submitted work. DJC is supported in part by the National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR) Barts Biomedical Research Center and received a grant from Pearl 
– a member of the AstraZeneca group for normal recruitment of patients. GTF 
reports grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from AstraZeneca during 
the conduct of the study; grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Pearl – a member of the AstraZeneca 
Group, and Sunovion; grants and personal fees from Theravance; and personal fees 
from Circassia, GlaxoSmithKline, Innoviva, Mylan, and Verona, outside of the 
submitted work. SS reports grant support from AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and 
Sanofi; and other support from Aradigm, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Circassia, Gilead, GlaxoSmithKline, Nabriva Therapeutics, Novavax, Paratek, 
Pulmonx, Sunovion, and Theravance Biopharma. GJF reports no conflict of interest 
in this work. MJ and CR are employees of AstraZeneca and hold stock and/or stock 
options in the company. GO is a former employee of AstraZeneca and holds stock 
and/or stock options in the company.


519. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2019 Oct 23;6(4):308-20. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.6.4.2019.0131.

The Impact of Twice-Daily Indacaterol/Glycopyrrolate on the Components of 
Health-Related Quality of Life and Dyspnea in Patients with Moderate-to-Severe 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Mahler DA(1), Kerwin E(2), Murray L(3), Dembek C(4).

Author information:
(1)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire.
(2)Clinical Research Institute of Southern Oregon, Medford, Oregon.
(3)Evidera, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., Marlborough, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Chronic cough, dyspnea, and excessive sputum production, the 
characteristic symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), can 
negatively affect patients' health-related quality of life (HRQoL). The 
fixed-dose combination of a long-acting beta2-adrenergic agonist and a 
long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LABA/LAMA) have been shown to improve HRQoL 
and COPD symptoms as measured by the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
(SGRQ) and the Transition Dyspnea Index (TDI) total scores. However, the impact 
of a LABA/LAMA on the individual components of HRQoL and dyspnea with daily 
activities is unknown.
METHODS: Secondary analysis of pooled data from 2 replicate, phase 3, 12-week, 
randomized, placebo, and active-controlled trials of twice-daily 
indacaterol/glycopyrrolate (IND/GLY) were analyzed. Change from baseline in 
HRQoL and dyspnea was measured by SGRQ and TDI, respectively. Total and 
component scores were evaluated using linear mixed models. Logistic regression 
was used to analyze the proportion of patients achieving minimum clinically 
important difference. Study outcomes were further explored in patient subgroups.
RESULTS: A total of 2038 patients from FLIGHT1/FLIGHT2 studies were evaluated. 
IND/GLY significantly improved SGRQ component scores (symptoms [-7.3], activity 
[-3.6], and impacts [-5.0]); all P < 0.001 compared with placebo. IND/GLY also 
significantly improved symptoms scores compared with IND and GLY (-3.5 and -3.7, 
respectively; both P < 0.001). Patients treated with IND/GLY also had 
significant improvements in TDI component scores compared with placebo: 
functional impairment (0.48), magnitude of task (0.61), and magnitude of effort 
(0.54); all P < 0.001. All component scores were significantly higher for 
IND/GLY compared with IND and GLY (P ≤ 0.002 for all).
CONCLUSIONS: Twice-daily IND/GLY significantly improved total scores as well as 
components of HRQoL and dyspnea in patients with COPD. These data demonstrate 
multiple clinical benefits of LABA/LAMA maintenance therapy in the COPD 
population. ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01727141 and NCT01712516.

JCOPDF © 2019.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.6.4.2019.0131
PMCID: PMC7006704
PMID: 31539467

Conflict of interest statement: Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., provided funding 
for this research. Donald A. Mahler has participated in advisory boards for 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Sunovion, 
Theravance, and Trevi. He is on the speaker’s bureau for AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, and Sunovion. Edward M. Kerwin has participated in advisory boards, 
speaker panels, or received travel reimbursement for AstraZeneca, Amphastar, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Mylan, Novartis, Pearl, Sunovion, Teva, and Theravance. He 
provided consulting services to Cipla and GlaxoSmithKline. Lindsey Murray is 
employed by Evidera, which provides consulting and other research services to 
pharmaceutical, device, government and nongovernment organizations. As an 
Evidera employee, she works with a variety of companies and organizations and is 
expressly prohibited from receiving any payment or honoraria directly from these 
organizations for services rendered. Carole Dembek is a full-time employee of 
Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc.


520. J Clin Med. 2020 May 12;9(5):1442. doi: 10.3390/jcm9051442.

Roflumilast in Severely Ill Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
with Frequent Exacerbations: Risk of Pneumonia Hospitalization and Severe 
Exacerbations.

Alispahic IA(1), Sørensen R(2), Eklöf J(1), Sivapalan P(1)(3), Løkke A(4), 
Seersholm N(1), Vestergaard JH(1), Jensen JS(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Respiratory Medicine Section, Herlev and 
Gentofte Hospital, University Hospital of Copenhagen, 2900 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Rigshospitalet, University Hospital of Copenhagen, 
University of Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Zealand University Hospital, 4000 Roskilde, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Medicine, Vejle, Hospital Little Belt, 7100 Vejle, Denmark.
(5)PERSIMUNE, Department of Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, 2100 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Roflumilast is given as an add-on to inhalation medication in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and chronic bronchitis. Animal 
experiments have documented deleterious effects of roflumilast in bacterial 
infections, but trials have not reported the risk of bacterial infections in 
patients. The objective of this study is to determine, among outpatients with 
severe COPD in a two-year follow-up period, the risk of 
hospitalization-requiring pneumonia, severe acute exacerbation in COPD 
(AECOPD-hosp), and death. Patients with COPD using roflumilast (roflumilast 
users) were compared to a propensity score-matched COPD control group not using 
roflumilast (non-roflumilast users). Roflumilast users had an increased 2-year 
risk of hospitalization-requiring pneumonia (HR 1.5, 95% CI 1.3 to 1.8, p-value 
< 0.0001) compared to controls, and of AECOPD-Hosp (hazard ratio(HR) 1.6, 95%, 
confidence interval (CI) 1.5 to 1.8, p-value < 0.0001) and. When adding an 
active comparator (theophylline) as a matching variable, the signal was largely 
unchanged. In conclusion, roflumilast was associated with an increased number of 
hospitalizations for pneumonia and for AECOPD. Since trials have not reported 
risks of bacterial complications and data regarding severe exacerbations in 
roflumilast users are sparse and diverging, these data are concerning. Trials 
focused on the risk of pneumonia, AECOPD, and other bacterial infections in 
roflumilast users are needed urgently.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9051442
PMCID: PMC7291283
PMID: 32408645

Conflict of interest statement: P.S. reports personal fees from Boehringer 
Ingelheim outside the submitted work. All other authors declare no conflict of 
interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the data 
collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.


521. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2020 Jan;7(1):49-59. doi: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.1.2019.0146.

The Burden of Cough and Phlegm in People With COPD: A COPD Patient-Powered 
Research Network Study.

Choate R(1)(2), Pasquale CB(1), Parada NA(3), Prieto-Centurion V(4), Mularski 
RA(5), Yawn BP(1).

Author information:
(1)Research, COPD Foundation, Inc., Washington, DC.
(2)University of Kentucky College of Public Health, Lexington.
(3)Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(4)University of Illinois at Chicago.
(5)Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research, Portland, Oregon.

RATIONALE: Cough and phlegm are common symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) and may significantly affect quality of life. This study assessed 
the burden of cough and phlegm on clinical outcomes and quality of life among 
people with a self-reported physician diagnosis of COPD.
METHODS: Patient-reported data from the COPD Foundation's Patient-Powered 
Research Network (COPD PPRN) were utilized. Cough and phlegm severity and 
frequency were assessed by responses to questions on the COPD Assessment Test 
(CAT) and categorized into none/low, moderate and severe. Quality of life 
domains were evaluated using the Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement 
Information System (PROMIS-29). Associations between cough and phlegm levels and 
PROMIS-29 domains were examined using multivariate analysis of variance 
(MANOVA).
RESULTS: The 5286 participants were average age 64.4 years (SD=11.4), 87.9% 
white, 60.4% female, 51.2% married, and 42.2% with caregivers. Approximately 
three-fourths of the participants had moderate or severe cough or phlegm levels. 
Respondents with moderate and high cough or phlegm had significantly worse 
dyspnea (p<0.0001), more exacerbations in the previous one year (p<0.0001), 
worse physical and social functioning, and more symptoms of anxiety and 
depression on PROMIS-29 compared to those with no/low cough and phlegm.
CONCLUSIONS: In this group of people with COPD, higher levels of cough and 
phlegm are associated with worse clinical and quality of life outcomes.

JCOPDF © 2020.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.1.2019.0146
PMCID: PMC7182382
PMID: 31999902

Conflict of interest statement: RC, RAM, and CBP report no conflict. NAP reports 
serving as a clinical advisor to Respirtech, a Phillips Company not related to 
the present work. VPC reports research funding by ResMed not related to the 
present work. BPY reports serving on advisory boards for GlaxoSmithKline, 
AstraZeneca, Novartis and Boehringer Ingelheim related to COPD.


522. Lung India. 2019 May-Jun;36(3):193-198. doi: 10.4103/lungindia.lungindia_340_18.

Nonadherence to treatment and quality of life among patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Mohsen S(1), Hanafy FZ(1), Fathy AA(1), El-Gilany AH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt.

OBJECTIVES: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the most 
common respiratory diseases. Assessment of medication nonadherence and quality 
of life (QOL) is important in such chronic diseases. The aim of the study was to 
describe treatment nonadherence and QOL of COPD patients and their associated 
factors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A cross-sectional study was performed in Mansoura Chest 
Hospital on 133 already diagnosed inpatient cases of COPD from March to August 
2017. Data were collected using two validated questionnaires, Morisky Medication 
Adherence Scale to assess medication adherence and St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire for COPD patients (SGRQ-c) to assess QOL.
RESULTS: About 45% of studied group were nonadherent to prescribed medications. 
Logistic regression analysis showed that duration of disease is the only 
independent risk factor for nonadherence. The scores on SGRQ-c indicated sever 
QOL affection in COPD. SGRQ-c scores show significant impairment with the 
presence of comorbidities, hospital admission, and frequency of exacerbations.
CONCLUSIONS: Nonadherence to treatment was affected mainly by the duration of 
disease. QOL impairment in COPD is influenced by broad range of factors 
suggesting the importance of QOL assessment in those patients. No association 
was found between nonadherence to treatment and QOL.

DOI: 10.4103/lungindia.lungindia_340_18
PMCID: PMC6503717
PMID: 31031337

Conflict of interest statement: None


523. Respiration. 2020;99(4):298-306. doi: 10.1159/000506520. Epub 2020 Apr 1.

Accelerated Loss of Antigravity Muscles Is Associated with Mortality in Patients 
with COPD.

Tanimura K(1), Sato S(2), Sato A(1), Tanabe N(1), Hasegawa K(1), Uemasu K(1), 
Hamakawa Y(1), Oguma T(1), Muro S(1)(3), Hirai T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan, ssato@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nara Medical University, Nara, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Low antigravity muscle mass is strongly associated with poor 
prognosis in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
However, the significance of longitudinal changes in antigravity muscle mass 
remains unclear in patients with COPD.
OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were to investigate the factors associated 
with the longitudinal loss of antigravity muscles and whether the accelerated 
loss of these muscles has a negative impact on prognosis.
METHODS: This study was part of a prospective observational study at Kyoto 
University. We enrolled stable male patients with COPD who underwent 
longitudinal quantitative CT analysis of the cross-sectional area of the erector 
spinae muscles (ESMCSA) at an interval of 3 years. The associations between the 
rate of change in ESMCSA (%ΔESM) and clinical parameters, such as anthropometry, 
symptoms, lung function, exacerbation frequency, and all-cause mortality, were 
investigated.
RESULTS: In total, 102 stable male COPD patients were successfully evaluated in 
this study (71.3 ± 8.3 years, GOLD stage I/II/III/IV = 20/47/28/7 patients). 
ESMCSA significantly decreased from 30.53 to 28.98 cm2 (p < 0.0001) in 3 years, 
and the mean %ΔESM was 5.21 ± 7.24%. The rate of survival during the observation 
period was 85.3% (87/102). Patients with an accelerated decline in ESMCSA (n = 
31; more than double the mean rate of decline) had a significantly higher 
frequency of moderate-to-severe exacerbations during the interval (p = 0.015). 
They also had significantly worse survival (p = 0.035 by log-rank test). A 
multivariate Cox proportional hazard model showed that lower ESMCSA and greater 
%ΔESM decline were independently and significantly associated with mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Frequent exacerbations were related to the loss of antigravity 
muscles in COPD patients. The accelerated loss of antigravity muscles was 
associated with a poor prognosis.

© 2020 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000506520
PMID: 32235124


524. BMC Pulm Med. 2020 Apr 29;20(1):111. doi: 10.1186/s12890-020-1152-8.

Treatment with LABA versus LAMA for stable COPD: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Koarai A(1), Sugiura H(2), Yamada M(2), Ichikawa T(2), Fujino N(2), Kawayama 
T(3), Ichinose M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8574, Japan. 
koarai@rm.med.tohoku.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8574, Japan.
(3)Division of Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, 
Kurume University School of Medicine, 67 Asahi-machi, Kurume, 830-0011, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Inhaled bronchodilators including long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) 
and long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) play a central role in the 
treatment of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, it is 
still unclear whether LABA or LAMA should be used for the initial treatment. 
Therefore, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the 
efficacy and safety of LABA versus LAMA in patients with stable COPD.
METHODS: We searched relevant randomized control trials (RCTs) with a period of 
treatment of at least 12 weeks and analyzed the exacerbations, quality of life, 
dyspnea score, lung function and adverse events as the outcomes of interest.
RESULTS: We carefully excluded unblinded data and identified a total of 19 RCTs 
(N = 28,211). LAMA significantly decreased the exacerbations compared to LABA 
(OR 0.85, 95% CI 0.74 to 0.98; P = 0.02). In St George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire and transitional dyspnoea index score, there were no differences 
between LABA and LAMA treatment. Compared to LABA, there was a small but 
significant increase in the trough FEV1 after LAMA treatment (Mean difference 
0.02, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.03, P = 0.0006). In the safety components, there was no 
difference in the serious adverse events between LABA and LAMA. However, LAMA 
showed a significantly lower incidence of total adverse events compared to LABA 
(OR 0.92, 95% CI 0.86 to 0.98; P = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: Treatment with LAMA in stable COPD provided a significantly lower 
incidence of exacerbation and non-serious adverse events, and a higher trough 
FEV1 compared to LABA.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: (PROSPERO: CRD42019144764).

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-020-1152-8
PMCID: PMC7191827
PMID: 32349720

Conflict of interest statement: AK reports grants from Novartis, personal fees 
for lectures from Astellas, AstraZeneca, KYORIN, Novartis, Sanofi and TAIHO, and 
personal fees for lectures and consulting from Boehringer Ingelheim and 
GlaxoSmithKline, outside the submitted work. HS reports grants from MSD and 
Novartis, personal fees for lectures from Astellas, KYORIN, Novartis and Sanofi, 
and personal fees for lectures and consulting from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim and GlaxoSmithKline, outside the submitted work. MY reports grants 
from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science and Novartis, and personal fees 
for lectures from AstraZeneca, Meiji Seika Pharma, Novartis and DAIICHI SANKYO, 
outside the submitted work. TI has nothing to disclose. NF reports personal fees 
for lectures from AstraZeneca, outside the submitted work. TK reports grants 
from Novartis, and personal fees for lectures from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Meiji Seika Pharma and GlaxoSmithKline, outside the submitted work. 
MI reports grants from Astellas, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, KYORIN and Novartis, personal fees for lectures from KYORIN, 
and personal fees for lectures and consulting from Astellas, AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline and Novartis, outside the submitted work.


525. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2020;97(2):12-19. doi: 
10.17116/kurort20209702112.

[Continuous-cycle technology of rehabilitation of patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease on an outpatient basis].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Zaripova TN(1)(2), Serebrova MA(2), Reshetova GG(1).

Author information:
(1)Siberia Federal Scientific and Clinical Center, Tomsk Region, Seversk, 
Russia.
(2)Siberia State Medical University, Tomsk, Russia.

AIM: Of this study is to substantiate the effectiveness of continuous-cycle 
technology of rehabilitation of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) on an outpatient basis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 140 patients with moderate to severe (stage II-III) COPD 
were examined: 82% with chronic bronchitis phenotype and 18% - with emphysema 
phenotype. 44% of patients had frequent exacerbations. Patients were admitted to 
outpatient rehabilitation after stages I and II because of the exacerbation of 
the disease. 2 comparable groups were formed: the primary group included 68 
patients who were engaged in active physical rehabilitation according to a 
continuous-cycle technique for 10-12 months; the comparison group consisted of 
72 patients receiving only basic drug therapy. Continuous-cycle technique 
included: regular exercise therapy, cycling and procedures that improve 
tolerance to them (hardware chest vibration, chlorpromazine electrophoresis), 
oxygen cocktail, general ultraviolet radiation in the unfavorable period of the 
year. Diagnostics of early signs of an exacerbation of the disease and 
prophylactic prescription of physiotherapeutic procedures were carried out.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: During the year of observation during treatment, only 4 
cases failed to prevent full exacerbation of the disease. During the year, in 
the patients of the primary group, in contrast to the comparison group, there 
was a significant improvement in the clinical signs of the disease, an increase 
in VC, an improvement in bronchial patency, an increase in physical performance 
and exercise tolerance, and a decrease in the activity of systemic inflammation. 
A year later, we registered an improvement in the course of the disease n 70% of 
patients of the primary group, and only stabilization of the process - in 82% of 
the comparison group. Frequency of exacerbations in the primary group decreased 
5.1 times, which was 3.9 times more significant than in the comparison group.

Publisher: ЦЕЛЬ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЯ: Обоснование эффективности непрерывно-цикловой 
технологии реабилитации больных хронической обструктивной болезнью легких (ХОБЛ) 
на амбулаторном этапе.
МАТЕРИАЛ И МЕТОДЫ: Обследованы 140 больных ХОБЛ II—III степени тяжести: 82% с 
бронхитическим фенотипом заболевания, 18% — с эмфизематозным. У 44% больных 
наблюдались частые обострения болезни. На амбулаторную реабилитацию пациенты 
поступали после прохождения I и II этапов в связи с обострением болезни. Были 
сформированы две сопоставимые группы: в основную группу вошли 68 пациентов, 
которые занимались активной физической реабилитацией по непрерывно-цикловой 
методике в течение 10—12 мес; в группу сравнения — 72 пациента, получающие 
только медикаментозную базисную терапию. Непрерывно-цикловая методика включала: 
регулярные занятия ЛФК, велотренировки и процедуры, улучшающие их переносимость 
(аппаратная вибрация грудной клетки, электрофорез аминазина), кислородный 
коктейль, общее УФО в неблагоприятный период года. Осуществлялись диагностика 
ранних признаков обострения болезни и проведение превентивного назначения 
физиотерапевтических процедур.
РЕЗУЛЬТАТЫ И ОБСУЖДЕНИЕ: За год наблюдения на фоне лечения лишь в 4 случаях не 
удалось предупредить развернутое обострение заболевания. В течение года у 
пациентов основной группы в отличие от группы сравнения отмечалось существенное 
улучшение клинической картины заболевания, рост ЖЕЛ, улучшение бронхиальной 
проходимости, повышение физической работоспособности и переносимости физических 
нагрузок, снижение активности системного воспаления. Через год у 70% больных 
основной группы было зарегистрировано улучшение течения болезни, у 82% больных 
группы сравнения — лишь стабилизация процесса. При этом частота обострений в 
основной группа снизилась в 5,1 раза, что было в 3,9 раза более значимо, чем в 
группе сравнения.

DOI: 10.17116/kurort20209702112
PMID: 32356630


526. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol. 2019 Mar 7;15:14. doi: 10.1186/s13223-019-0329-2. 
eCollection 2019.

Availability and affordability of medicines and diagnostic tests recommended for 
management of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in sub-Saharan 
Africa: a systematic review.

Kibirige D(1)(2), Sanya RE(2), Nantanda R(3)(4), Worodria W(5), Kirenga B(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Uganda Martyrs Hospital Lubaga, P.O.BOX 14130, 
Kampala, Uganda.
(2)2Non-communicable Diseases Theme, Medical Research Council/Uganda Virus 
Research Institute and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine Uganda 
Research Unit, Entebbe, Uganda.
(3)3Makerere University Lung Institute, Makerere University College of Health 
Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
(4)4Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Makerere University College of 
Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
(5)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Medicine, Mulago National Referral and 
Teaching Hospital, Kampala, Uganda.

BACKGROUND: Early accurate diagnosis and sustainable availability of affordable 
medicines and diagnostic tests is fundamental in optimal management of asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We systematically reviewed 
original research articles about availability and affordability of medicines and 
diagnostic tests recommended for management of asthma and COPD in sub-Saharan 
Africa (SSA).
METHODS: We searched PubMed, Scopus and African Journal Online for original 
research articles conducted in SSA between 2000 and March 2018 containing 
information about availability and affordability of any recommended medicine and 
diagnostic test for asthma and COPD.
RESULTS: The search yielded 9 eligible research articles. Availability of 
short-acting beta agonists (SABA), inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and short 
acting anti-muscarinic agents (SAMA) ranged between 19.9-100%, 0-45.5% and 
0-14.3% respectively. Combination of ICS-long acting beta agonists (LABA) were 
available in 0-14.3% of facilities surveyed. There was absence of inhaled long 
acting anti-muscarinic agents (LAMA) and LAMA/LABA combinations. Spirometry and 
peak expiratory flow devices were available in 24.4-29.4% and 6.7-53.6% 
respectively. Affordability of SABA and ICS varied greatly, ranging from < 2 to 
107 days' wages while ICS-LABA combinations, SAMA and oral theophylline plus 
leukotriene receptor antagonists cost 6.4-17.1, 13.7 and 6.9 days' wages 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Availability and affordability of medicines and diagnostics 
recommended for the management of asthma and COPD is a big challenge in SSA. 
Research about this subject in this region is still limited. More robustly 
performed studies are required to further understand the magnitude of inequity 
in access to these medicines and diagnostic tests in SSA and also to formulate 
simple pragmatic solutions to address this challenge.

DOI: 10.1186/s13223-019-0329-2
PMCID: PMC6407228
PMID: 30899279


527. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2019 Nov;13(11):1087-1094. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2019.1665514. Epub 2019 Sep 13.

Comparing a fixed combination of budesonide/formoterol with other inhaled 
corticosteroid plus long-acting beta-agonist combinations in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a review.

Solidoro P(1), Patrucco F(2), Bagnasco D(3).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular and Thoracic Department, SC Pneumologia U, Città della Salute 
e della Scienza (Molinette) University Hospital , Turin , Italy.
(2)Department of Translational Medicine, Pneumology Unit U, University of 
Piemonte Orientale , Vercelli , Italy.
(3)Allergy & Respiratory Diseases, DIMI Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Genoa , Genoa , Italy.

Introduction: Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) plus long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) 
combinations are commonly used in the treatment of patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). At least four fixed-dose ICS/LABA 
combinations are available, including budesonide/formoterol, 
beclomethasone/formoterol, fluticasone/vilanterol and fluticasone/salmeterol, 
but there is little guidance for clinicians on which of these combinations to 
prescribe. Areas covered: The aim of this in-depth review was to identify 
studies that compared budesonide/formoterol with the other ICS/LABA combinations 
and assess the data on exacerbations, safety, and patient quality of life. 
PubMed and Ovid databases were searched, and 14 studies were identified. Our 
findings highlight the lack of prospective, randomized, controlled trials 
comparing LABA/ICS combinations in the treatment of COPD as only two such 
studies were identified. However, current evidence suggests that the effects of 
budesonide/formoterol on reducing exacerbations and improving quality of life 
may be similar to, or more marked than, those of other LABA/ICS combinations in 
COPD and, compared with the other LABA/ICS combinations, budesonide/formoterol 
may be associated with a lower incidence of serious pneumonia events and oral 
candidiasis. Expert opinion: To better guide clinicians in selecting between the 
available ICS/LABA, robust meta-analyses and well-designed head-to-head clinical 
trials are urgently needed.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2019.1665514
PMID: 31498714


528. J Thorac Dis. 2019 Sep;11(9):3785-3793. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2019.09.22.

Clinical predictors of asthmatics in identifying subgroup requiring long-term 
tiotropium add-on therapy: a real-world study.

Cheng WC(1)(2)(3), Liao WC(1)(3)(4), Wu BR(1)(2), Chen CY(1)(3)(4), Shen MF(1), 
Chen WC(1)(3)(4), Hsia TC(1)(3)(5), Tu CY(1)(2)(6), Chen CH(1)(4)(7), Hsu WH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung.
(2)School of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy Center, China 
Medical University, Taichung.
(4)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, China Medical University, 
Taichung.
(5)Department of Respiratory Therapy, China Medical University, Taichung.
(6)Department of Life Science, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung.
(7)Taiwan Clinical Trial Consortium for Lung Diseases (TCoC), Taichung.

BACKGROUND: According to several phase III studies, tiotropium [a long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA)] is a well-tolerated add-on therapy to inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) for asthmatics with or without the addition of long-acting 
beta2-agonists (LABAs). However, real-world studies based on clinical phenotypes 
to predict the long-term need of tiotropium as an add-on therapy for asthmatics 
are limited.
METHODS: This is a retrospective study conducted at a single medical center in 
Taiwan from July 2016 to July 2018. An asthma control test (ACT) is applied to 
uncontrolled asthmatics to evaluate the effectiveness of tiotropium as an add-on 
therapy. Asthmatic subgroups with different clinical phenotypes and needing 
long-term tiotropium as a maintenance treatment are identified. The 
effectiveness of tiotropium add-on therapy is defined as an improvement of ACT 
score ≥3 points 3 months after the treatment (vs. baseline), while the long-term 
requirement of tiotropium is defined as tiotropium dependency >1 year.
RESULTS: The study analyzed a total of 160 uncontrolled asthmatics regardless of 
low- or medium-to-high-dose ICS plus LABA. One hundred and twelve patients 
responded well (ACT score increased ≥3 points) to tiotropium. These patients 
were further divided into two subgroups: one with tiotropium add-on therapy for 
≥1 year due to patients' difficulties in stepping down from tiotropium; the 
other with tiotropium add-on therapy for <1 year due to successful step-down 
treatment according to Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) score. All clinical 
characteristics of these two groups were collected and analyzed. Univariate and 
multivariate analyses showed that asthma-and-chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD)-overlap (ACO), initial forced expiratory volume-one second (FEV1) 
% predicted <80%, or body mass index (BMI) >30 kg/m2 were predictors for 
asthmatics requiring long-term tiotropium add-on therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Tiotropium add-on therapy is effective for uncontrolled asthmatics. 
Moreover, patients with ACO, initial FEV1% predicted <80%, or BMI >30 kg/m2 
require long-term tiotropium add-on therapy for asthma control.

2019 Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.09.22
PMCID: PMC6790467
PMID: 31656651

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.


529. J Korean Med Sci. 2020 Jan 13;35(2):e10. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e10.

Clinical Role of the Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Assessment Test in 
Prediction of the Response to Treatment for Exacerbations.

Yoon S(1), Kim TE(2), Kim TH(3), Na JO(4), Shin KC(5), Rhee CK(6), Jung SS(7), 
Choe KH(8), Yoo KH(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chungnam National University Hospital, 
Daejeon, Korea.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Konkuk University School of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(3)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Hanyang University 
Guri Hospital, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Guri, Korea.
(4)Division of Allergy and Respiratory Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Soonchunhyang University Cheonan Hospital, Cheonan, Korea.
(5)Regional Center for Respiratory Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Yeungnam University Medical Center, Yeungnam University College of Medicine, 
Daegu, Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of 
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon, Korea.
(8)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Chungbuk National University College of Medicine, Cheongju, Korea.
(9)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. khyou@kuh.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: The chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) assessment test 
(CAT) is a validated, eight-item questionnaire used to quantify the health 
status of patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the usefulness of the 
CAT questionnaire as a tool to assess the response to treatment in acute 
exacerbations of COPD in an outpatient setting.
METHODS: A multicenter, phase 3 randomized controlled trial was conducted 
previously to examine the efficacy and safety of oral zabofloxacin for the 
treatment of COPD exacerbations. In the present post hoc analysis of the 
original study, patients with COPD exacerbation were categorized as responders 
or non-responders according to the respiratory symptoms persisting on day 10 
(visit 3) of treatment. The CAT questionnaire was completed daily by patients at 
home from the initial visit to the second visit on day 5. Subsequently, the 
questionnaire was completed in the presence of a physician on days 10 (visit 3) 
and 36 (visit 4). Multivariate regression analysis was performed to determine 
the association between CAT scores and the therapeutic response.
RESULTS: The CAT scores decreased more rapidly in responders compared to 
non-responders during the first 5 days (23.3-20.4 vs. 23.5-22). Among 
responders, patients with higher severity of illness also revealed higher CAT 
scores on the first day of an exacerbation (mild, 19.8; moderate, 21.4; severe, 
23.8; very severe, 28.6). Multivariate analysis revealed that a change in the 
CAT score during the first 3 days influenced the therapeutic response. A 
significant decrease in scores in the domains of sputum production, chest 
tightness, and activities of daily living was seen among responders.
CONCLUSION: Early improvement in CAT scores may be associated with a more 
favorable response to the treatment of COPD exacerbations.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01658020.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical Research Information Service Identifier: 
KCT0000532.

© 2020 The Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e10
PMCID: PMC6955431
PMID: 31920016

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.


530. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Apr 1;14:757-766. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S192166. eCollection 2019.

Risks of budesonide/formoterol for the treatment of stable COPD: a 
meta-analysis.

Tang B(1), Wang J(1), Luo LL(1), Li QG(1), Huang D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital 
Affiliated to Nanchang University, No. 92 Aiguo Road, Nanchang, 330006, Jiangxi, 
China, liqiugenjxyy@126.com.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, No. 1 Minde Road, Nanchang, 330006, Jiangxi, China, 
tanghuang05@163.com.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to investigate the comparative risks of 
budesonide/formoterol, versus placebo or monotherapies, for the treatment of 
patients with stable COPD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We undertook a systematic search of the literature in 
PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, for 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing budesonide/formoterol with control 
regimens for the treatment of patients with stable COPD and at least 12 weeks of 
follow-up, meeting the inclusion criteria. Studies were reviewed, and OR with 
corresponding 95% CI was used to pool the results.
RESULTS: A total of eight studies involving 9,254 patients met the inclusion 
criteria of this meta-analysis. Compared with placebo, combination therapy with 
budesonide/formoterol was associated with a significantly higher risk of adverse 
effects including oral candidiasis (OR: 3.09, 95% CI: 1.95-4.91) and dysphonia 
(OR: 2.76, 95% CI: 1.40-5.44), but not pneumonia (OR: 0.94, 95% CI: 0.64-1.37) 
or bronchitis (OR: 1.36, 95% CI: 0.95-1.95). A similar pattern was also evident 
for the comparison of formoterol with budesonide/formoterol, with increased 
occurrence of oral candidiasis (OR: 2.72, 95% CI: 1.33-5.58) and dysphonia (OR: 
4.13, 95% CI: 1.95-8.76); however, there were no significant differences in 
pneumonia (OR: 1.31, 95% CI: 0.98-1.74) or bronchitis (OR: 1.05, 95% CI: 
0.83-1.31). In contrast, compared with budesonide, combined 
budesonide/formoterol was associated with similar risks of adverse effects, 
including pneumonia (OR: 1.20, 95% CI: 0.60-2.39), bronchitis (OR: 0.95, 95% CI: 
0.41-2.20), oral candidiasis (OR: 0.79, 95% CI: 0.41-1.53), and dysphonia (OR: 
1.00, 95% CI: 0.40-2.47).
CONCLUSION: Combination therapy does not cause more adverse events, including 
pneumonia and bronchitis, than control (placebo, formoterol, or budesonide) 
treatment in patients with stable COPD, while there were higher risks of oral 
candidiasis and dysphonia compared with the non-inhaled corticosteroid group 
(placebo, formoterol).

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S192166
PMCID: PMC6448539
PMID: 31015757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


531. Respir Med Case Rep. 2019 Sep 27;28:100936. doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2019.100936. 
eCollection 2019.

Exacerbation of eosinophilic COPD and pneumonia in post-treatment pulmonary 
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis patient: A case report.

Maranatha D(1), Julian Parade NN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine 
Airlangga University - Dr Soetomo General Hospital Surabaya, Indonesia.

Eosinophilic chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a COPD phenotype 
with several clinical characteristics such as eosinophilic airway inflammation, 
more common in men and less severe COPD. Eosinophilic COPD has more 
exacerbations but responds well to corticosteroids and bronchodilators. We 
hereby report the case of a patient who came to us with shortness of breath, 
fever, wheezing and a cough with yellow phlegm. He had a history of smoking 4.5 
pack-year and two episodes of pulmonary tuberculosis (the second was pulmonary 
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis). He was diagnosed with eosinophilic COPD 
exacerbation and pneumonia. Intravenous corticosteroids, bronchodilators and 
antibiotics were given and his condition improved after a week of 
hospitalisation. Smoking and pulmonary tuberculosis are risk factors for COPD. 
In this case, irreversible airflow obstruction is related to COPD and also 
pulmonary TB. There are several mechanisms that cause airway obstruction in 
pulmonary tuberculosis, one of which is persistent mycobacterium acting as a 
co-factor along with smoking and several environmental factors that cause 
chronic airway inflammation and result in bronchial narrowing with or without 
parenchymal destruction.

© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2019.100936
PMCID: PMC6812294
PMID: 31667072

Conflict of interest statement: There was no conflict of interest in this study. 
No funding was received for this study. Written informed consent was obtained 
for publication of this case report.


532. J Clin Med. 2019 Nov 22;8(12):2058. doi: 10.3390/jcm8122058.

LABAs and p38MAPK Inhibitors Reverse the Corticosteroid-Insensitivity of IL-8 in 
Airway Smooth Muscle Cells of COPD.

Knobloch J(1), Jungck D(1)(2), Kronsbein J(1), Stoelben E(3), Ito K(4), Koch 
A(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Medical Clinic III for Pneumology, Allergology and Sleep Medicine, 
Bergmannsheil University Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum, 
Bürkle-de-la-Camp-Platz 1, 44789 Bochum, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine II, Pneumology, Allergology and Respiratory 
Medicine, Bethel Teaching Hospital, 12207 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Lungclinic, Thoracic Surgery, Hospital of Cologne, Private University Witten 
Herdecke, 51109 Cologne, Germany.
(4)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW3 6LY, 
UK.
(5)Zürcher RehaZentren Davos, 7272 Davos-Clavadel, Switzerland.
(6)Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich (LMU), 81377 Munich, Germany.
(7)DZL (German Center of Lung Science), Hannover, Germany.

Airway inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is partially 
insensitive/resistant to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). ICS plus bronchodilator 
therapy has been discussed for COPD phenotypes with frequent exacerbations and 
participation of corticosteroid-sensitive type 2/eosinophilic inflammation. 
Neutralization of non-type 2/IL-8-associated airway inflammation by reversion of 
its corticosteroid-resistance might be a future strategy for other phenotypes. 
Human airway smooth muscle cells (HASMCs) produce corticosteroid-insensitive 
IL-8 in response to TNFα or LPS in stable disease stages or bacteria-induced 
exacerbations, respectively. p38-mitogen-activated-protein-kinases (p38MAPKs) 
are alternative therapeutic targets. Hypothesis: long-acting-β2-agonists (LABAs) 
reverse the corticosteroid-insensitivity of IL-8 by p38MAPK inhibition in 
HASMCs. Cultivated HASMCs from COPD subjects were pre-incubated with formoterol, 
salmeterol, fluticasone-propionate, BIRB796 (p38MAPKα, -γ, -δ inhibitor), and/or 
SB203580 (p38MAPKα and -β inhibitor) before stimulation with TNFα or LPS. IL-8 
and MAPK-activities were measured by ELISA. Formoterol, salmeterol, and 
fluticasone did not or hardly reduced TNFα- or LPS-induced IL-8. BIRB796 and 
SB203580 reduced TNFα-induced IL-8. SB203580 reduced LPS-induced IL-8. 
Fluticasone/formoterol, fluticasone/salmeterol, and fluticasone/BIRB796, but not 
fluticasone/SB203580 combinations, reduced TNFα-induced IL-8 stronger than 
single treatments. All combinations including fluticasone/SB203580 reduced 
LPS-induced IL-8 stronger than single treatments. TNFα induced p38MAPKα and -γ 
activity. LPS induced p38MAPKα activity. Formoterol reduced TNFα-induced 
p38MAPKγ and LPS-induced p38MAPKα activity. LABAs reverse the 
corticosteroid-insensitivity of IL-8 in airway smooth muscles via p38MAPKγ in 
stable disease and via p38MAPKα in exacerbations. Our pre-clinical data indicate 
a utility for also adding ICS in non-type 2 inflammatory COPD phenotypes to 
bronchodilator therapy. Depending on phenotype and disease stage, 
isoform-specific p38MAPK blockers might also reverse corticosteroid-resistance 
in COPD.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm8122058
PMCID: PMC6947523
PMID: 31766770

Conflict of interest statement: Knobloch: Speaker fees and travel grants from 
AstraZeneca, travel grants from Actelion Pharmaceuticals, Teva Pharmaceutical 
Industries, and Boehringer Ingelheim. Jungck: served on an advisory board for 
Sanofi-Aventis, speaker fees from Novartis and Actelion Pharmaceuticals, travel 
grants from Actelion Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Sanofi, Teva 
Pharmaceutical Industries, Roche. Kronsbein: none related to this study. 
Stoelben: none related to this study. Ito: K.I. is an employee of Pulmocide 
Ltd., a former head of biology in Respivert Ltd. and has an honorary contract 
with Imperial College. Koch: Speaker fees and travel grants from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer, Novartis, Speaker fees from GSK.


533. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2019 Jul 24;6(3):210-220. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.6.3.2018.0167.

Introducing the New COPD Pocket Consultant Guide App: Can A Digital Approach 
Improve Care? A Statement of the COPD Foundation.

Thomashow B(1), Crapo JD(2), Drummond MB(3), Han MK(4), Kalhan R(5), Malanga 
E(6), Malanga V(6), Mannino DM(7), Rennard S(8), Sciurba FC(9), Willard KS(6), 
Wise R(10), Yawn B(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Columbia 
University, New York.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, National Jewish 
Health, Denver, Colorado.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor.
(5)Asthma and COPD Program, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois.
(6)COPD Foundation, Washington, D.C.
(7)GlaxoSmithKline, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Department of Preventative 
Medicine and Environmental Health University of Kentucky, College of Public 
Health, Lexington.
(8)Early Clinical Development, IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom and Department of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha.
(9)Division of Pulmonary Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(10)Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

The COPD Foundation has tried to address gaps in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) care by providing COPD Pocket Consultant Guide cards to U.S. 
health care providers. Since launching the card in 2007, there have been 
numerous updates and more than 800,000 of these cards have been distributed at 
no charge to health care professionals. The most recent versions have 
concentrated on presenting an algorithm for COPD management based on 7 severity 
domains: spirometry, symptoms, exacerbations, oxygen requirements, the presence 
of chronic bronchitis or emphysema and comorbidities. To increase the usability 
and reach of this tool, the COPD Pocket Consultant Guide is now available as an 
app for iOS and Android. This updated version of the app includes new COPD and 
asthma/COPD overlap flow charts; an interactive therapy chart that takes into 
account modified Medical Research Council (mMRC), COPD Assessment Test (CAT), 
and spirometry scores; anxiety and depression screeners; up-to-date medication 
charts in both brand and generic formats; a checklist to aid in determining when 
a patient should be referred to a pulmonologist and more. Potential use of the 
COPD Pocket Consultant Guide app in clinical care is discussed.

JCOPDF © 2019.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.6.3.2018.0167
PMCID: PMC6872221
PMID: 31075813

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Drummond reports personal fees from 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Novavax, and Mylan, outside 
the submitted work. Dr. Han reports personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, and AstraZeneca and research support from Novartis and 
Sunovion, outside the submitted work. Dr. Kalhan reports grants from the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute during the conduct of the study; 
grants and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, grants from PneumRx (BTG), 
grants from Spiration, grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca, personal fees 
from CVS Caremark, personal fees from Aptus Health, grants and personal fees 
from GlaxoSmithKline, personal fees from Boston Scientific, personal fees from 
Boston Consulting Group, outside the submitted work. Dr. Mannino reports 
personal fees and other from GlaxoSmithKline, outside the submitted work. Dr. 
Rennard is an employee of AstraZeneca and owns shares in the organization. Dr. 
Sciurba reports grants from the National Institutes of Health, the Department of 
Defense, the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania, the COPD Foundation, ResMed Corp., Forest Research Institute, 
PulmonX, Olympus, Gala Therapeutics, Inc., Astellas, Philips Respironics, and 
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals; grants and other from Boehringer-Ingelheim 
Pharmaceuticals, GlaxoSmithKline, and BTG International; and other from 
Circassia, outside the submitted work. Dr. Thomashow is co-founder and former 
Chair of the Board of Directors for the COPD Foundation and currently serves as 
its Chief Medical Officer. He has served as a consultant for Boehringer 
Ingelheim and served on advisory boards for GlaxoSmithKline and Astra Zeneca. 
Dr. Wise reports grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca / Medimmune, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and Boehringer-Ingelheim, personal fees from 
Contrafect, Pulmonx, Roche / Genentech, Spiration, Pneuma, Verona, Bonti, 
Denali, Aradigm, Mylan, Theravance, Propeller Health, Kiniksa, Sunovion, Merck, 
and Circassia; and grants from Pearl Therapeutics, outside the submitted work. 
Dr. Yawn reports personal fees and non-financial support from Boehringer 
Ingelheim and personal fees from AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis 
outside the submitted work. All other authors have nothing to declare.


534. Respir Res. 2020 Jan 10;21(1):17. doi: 10.1186/s12931-020-1280-y.

Reduced risk of clinically important deteriorations by ICS in COPD is eosinophil 
dependent: a pooled post-hoc analysis.

Bafadhel M(1), Singh D(2), Jenkins C(3), Peterson S(4), Bengtsson T(4), Wessman 
P(5), Fagerås M(5).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Old Road Campus, Oxford, OX3 7LF, UK. mona.bafadhel@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Medicines Evaluation Unit, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)The George Institute for Global Health, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, Australia.
(4)StatMind, Lund, Sweden.
(5)AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Clinically Important Deterioration (CID) is a novel composite 
measure to assess treatment effect in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). We examined the performance and utility of CID in assessing the effect 
of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in COPD.
METHODS: This post-hoc analysis of four budesonide/formoterol (BUD/FORM) studies 
comprised 3576 symptomatic moderate-to-very-severe COPD patients with a history 
of exacerbation. Analysis of time to first CID event (exacerbation, 
deterioration in forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] or worsening St 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire [SGRQ] score) was completed using Cox 
proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: The proportion of patients with ≥1 CID in the four studies ranged 
between 63 and 77% and 69-84% with BUD/FORM and FORM, respectively, with an 
average 25% reduced risk of CID with BUD/FORM. All components contributed to the 
CID event rate. Experiencing a CID during the first 3 months was associated with 
poorer outcomes (lung function, quality of life, symptoms and reliever use) and 
increased risk of later CID events. The effect of BUD/FORM versus FORM in 
reducing CID risk was positively associated with the blood eosinophil count.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that BUD/FORM offers protective effects for 
CID events compared with FORM alone, with the magnitude of the effect dependent 
on patients' eosinophil levels. CID may be an important tool for evaluation of 
treatment effect in a complex, multifaceted, and progressive disease like COPD, 
and a valuable tool to allow for shorter and smaller future outcome predictive 
trials in early drug development.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-020-1280-y
PMCID: PMC6954504
PMID: 31924197

Conflict of interest statement: MB has received honoraria and travel expenses 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi and GlaxoSmithKline. DS has 
received personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, 
Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, Menarini, Mundipharma, Novartis, 
Peptinnovate, Pfizer, Pulmatrix, Theravance and Verona. CRJ has received 
speaking and advisory fees and fees for attending advisory boards for 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Menarini, 
Mundipharma and Sanofi Regeneron. SP and TB are employees of StatMind, which 
received funding from AstraZeneca to complete the statistical analyses. PW and 
MF are full-time employees of AstraZeneca.


535. Lancet Respir Med. 2020 Mar 13:S2213-2600(19)30397-2. doi: 
10.1016/S2213-2600(19)30397-2. Online ahead of print.

The Acute COPD Exacerbation Prediction Tool (ACCEPT): a modelling study.

Adibi A(1), Sin DD(2), Safari A(1), Johnson KM(1), Aaron SD(3), FitzGerald 
JM(4), Sadatsafavi M(5).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Evaluation Sciences Program, Collaboration for Outcomes Research 
and Evaluation, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, The UBC Centre for 
Heart Lung Innovation, St. Paul's Hospital, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada. Electronic address: don.sin@hli.ubc.ca.
(3)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Institute for Heart and Lung Health, Division of Respiratory Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(5)Respiratory Evaluation Sciences Program, Collaboration for Outcomes Research 
and Evaluation, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Institute for Heart and Lung Health, Division 
of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada; Centre for Clinical Epidemiology and Evaluation, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Accurate prediction of exacerbation risk enables personalised care 
for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We developed and 
validated a generalisable model to predict individualised rate and severity of 
COPD exacerbations.
METHODS: In this risk modelling study, we pooled data from three COPD trials on 
patients with a history of exacerbations. We developed a mixed-effect model to 
predict exacerbations over 1 year. Severe exacerbations were those requiring 
inpatient care. Predictors were history of exacerbations, age, sex, body-mass 
index, smoking status, domiciliary oxygen therapy, lung function, symptom 
burden, and current medication use. Evaluation of COPD Longitudinally to 
Identify Predictive Surrogate End-points (ECLIPSE), a multicentre cohort study, 
was used for external validation.
RESULTS: The development dataset included 2380 patients, 1373 (58%) of whom were 
men. Mean age was 64·7 years (SD 8·8). Mean exacerbation rate was 1·42 events 
per year and 0·29 events per year were severe. When validated against all 
patients with COPD in ECLIPSE (mean exacerbation rate was 1·20 events per year, 
0·27 events per year were severe), the area-under-curve (AUC) was 0·81 (95% CI 
0·79-0·83) for at least two exacerbations and 0·77 (95% CI 0·74-0·80) for at 
least one severe exacerbation. Predicted exacerbation and observed exacerbation 
rates were similar (1·31 events per year for all exacerbations and 0·25 events 
per year for severe exacerbations vs 1·20 events per year and 0·27 events per 
year). In ECLIPSE, in patients with previous exacerbation history (mean 
exacerbation rate was 1·82 events per year, 0·40 events per year were severe), 
AUC was 0·73 (95% CI 0·70-0·76) for two or more exacerbations and 0·74 (95% CI 
0·70-0·78) for at least one severe exacerbation. Calibration was accurate for 
severe exacerbations (predicted 0·37 events per year vs observed 0·40 events per 
year) and all exacerbations (predicted 1·80 events per year vs observed 1·82 
events per year).
INTERPRETATION: This model can be used as a decision tool to personalise COPD 
treatment and prevent exacerbations.
FUNDING: Canadian Institutes of Health Research.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(19)30397-2
PMID: 32178776


536. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 10;14:2873-2883. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S228497. eCollection 2019.

Metabolic Syndrome in Early Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Gender 
Differences and Impact on Exacerbation and Medical Costs.

Choi HS(1), Rhee CK(2), Park YB(3)(4), Yoo KH(5), Lim SY(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Kyung Hee Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Lung Research Institute of Hallym University College of Medicine, Chuncheon, 
South Korea.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Hallym University Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Konkuk University Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a well-known comorbidity of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, their interrelationship, 
particularly in early COPD, remains unclear. Therefore, we aimed to assess the 
prevalence and clinical characteristics of MetS in patients with early COPD, and 
to explore the impact of MetS on the frequency of COPD exacerbations and 
associated medical costs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively enrolled 43,874 subjects from the 
KNHANES, including 2164 patients with early COPD (≥40 years old), recorded 
smoking history, and Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
spirometric grade I or II, with data linked to the NHI database. We extracted 
and analyzed data regarding health-care utilization and medical costs for 5 
years (2007 to 2012).
RESULTS: Among 2164 patients with early COPD, the prevalence of MetS was 31.2%, 
and it was higher in women than in men (35.1% vs. 26.6%; P<0.001). Patients with 
MetS were older and had lower pulmonary function and greater number of 
comorbidities. The frequency of moderate-to-severe COPD exacerbations for 5 
years was significantly higher in women with MetS than in those without MetS 
(5.8/year vs. 4.9/year; P=0.02). After adjusting for confounding factors, the 
risk for moderate-to-severe exacerbation was significantly greater in women with 
MetS (IRR, 1.17; 95% CI, 1.01 to 1.36; P=0.03). COPD exacerbations leading to 
hospitalization and medical expenses were also higher in women with MetS than in 
those without MetS.
CONCLUSION: MetS is more prevalent in women with early COPD. MetS increased the 
frequency of exacerbations and the medical costs in women with early COPD.

© 2019 Choi et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S228497
PMCID: PMC6911318
PMID: 31849460

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


537. Lung India. 2019 May-Jun;36(3):183-187. doi: 10.4103/lungindia.lungindia_163_18.

New combined assessment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Utilization, 
pitfalls, and association with spirometry.

Dua R(1), Kumari R(2), Yadav V(1), Ranjan M(1), Kumar S(3), Mishra M(1), 
Tripathi S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, AIIMS, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, India.
(2)Department of Community and Family Medicine, AIIMS, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, 
India.
(3)Department of Emergency and Trauma, AIIMS, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, India.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, KGMU, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

INTRODUCTION: Classification of chronic obstructive pulmonary (COPD) disease has 
changed from being solely based on spirometric variables to combined assessment 
including symptom scores and history of exacerbations/ hospitalizations. There 
is both lack of awareness regarding change in its assessment as well as 
underutilization due to time constraints and seeming complexity. Moreover, 
treatment of COPD needs to be tailored according to the new combined assessment.
AIMS: Current study was planned to look at current stratification of patients 
according to new revised combined assessment (Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease GOLD 2017) in comparison to old(GOLD 2011) as well as 
its incorporation in clinical practice. Co-relation between revised combined 
assessment and spirometric staging was also assessed.
METHODS: 418 consecutive COPD patients were enrolled, their dyspnea scores in 
terms of modified medical research council scale (mMRC), preceding history of 
hospitalization/ exacerbation over preceding one year and spirometric variables 
were recorded. Their stratification according to old and new classification 
recorded. Their past treatment records were reviewed and combined assessment if 
done recorded.
RESULTS: Substantial shift of categories is seen from C and D respectively to 
stage A and B on applying the new classification compared to old i.e more severe 
to less severe. Secondly, revised combined assessment is still highly 
underutilized. Revised combined assessment has positive co-relation with 
spirometry and post bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second(FEV1).
CONCLUSIONS: Management of substantial number of stable COPD patients may need 
to be stepped down in accordance with revised combined assessment. There is a 
need to disseminate information regarding change in COPD classification and 
stress on its incorporation in our day-to day clinical practice. Revised 
combined assessment has positive co-relation with spirometry, stressing its 
utility even in peripheral centers without spirometry facilities.

DOI: 10.4103/lungindia.lungindia_163_18
PMCID: PMC6503706
PMID: 31031335

Conflict of interest statement: None


538. Sci Rep. 2020 Feb 20;10(1):3118. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-60042-1.

A Machine-learning Approach to Forecast Aggravation Risk in Patients with Acute 
Exacerbation of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease with Clinical Indicators.

Peng J(1), Chen C(1), Zhou M(2), Xie X(1), Zhou Y(3), Luo CH(4).

Author information:
(1)Sun Yat-sen University, School of Data and Computer Science, Guangzhou, 
510006, China.
(2)Sun Yat-sen University, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou, 510640, 
China.
(3)Sun Yat-sen University, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou, 510640, 
China. zhouyuqi@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(4)Sun Yat-sen University, School of Data and Computer Science, Guangzhou, 
510006, China. luojinx5@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) repeat acute 
exacerbations (AE). Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD) is only available for patients in stable phase. Currently, there is a 
lack of assessment and prediction methods for acute exacerbation of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) patients during hospitalization. To 
enhance the monitoring and treatment of AECOPD patients, we develop a novel C5.0 
decision tree classifier to predict the prognosis of AECOPD hospitalized 
patients with objective clinical indicators. The medical records of 410 
hospitalized AECOPD patients are collected and 28 features including vital 
signs, medical history, comorbidities and various inflammatory indicators are 
selected. The overall accuracy of the proposed C5.0 decision tree classifier is 
80.3% (65 out of 81 participants) with 95% Confidence Interval (CI):(0.6991, 
0.8827) and Kappa 0.6054. In addition, the performance of the model constructed 
by C5.0 exceeds the C4.5, classification and regression tree (CART) model and 
the iterative dichotomiser 3 (ID3) model. The C5.0 decision tree classifier 
helps respiratory physicians to assess the severity of the patient early, 
thereby guiding the treatment strategy and improving the prognosis of patients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-60042-1
PMCID: PMC7033165
PMID: 32080330

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


539. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Dec;59:101841. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101841. Epub 
2019 Sep 11.

Efficacy and cardiovascular safety profile of dual bronchodilation therapy in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A bidimensional comparative analysis 
across fixed-dose combinations.

Rogliani P(1), Matera MG(2), Ritondo BL(3), De Guido I(3), Puxeddu E(3), Cazzola 
M(3), Calzetta L(3).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
paola.rogliani@uniroma2.it.
(2)Unit of Pharmacology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(3)Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Experimental Medicine, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.

Despite several long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA)/long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) are currently 
approved for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
there are limited findings concerning the direct comparison across the different 
LABA/LAMA FDCs. The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy/safety profile 
of approved LABA/LAMA FDCs in COPD. A network meta-analysis was performed by 
linking the efficacy (forced expiratory volume in 1 s, St' George Respiratory 
Questionnaire, transitional dyspnea index) and safety (cardiovascular serious 
adverse events) outcomes resulting from randomized controlled trials that 
directly compared LABA/LAMA FDCs with placebo and/or each other. The Surface 
Under the Cumulative Ranking Curve Analysis (SUCRA) was performed for each 
single outcome (SUCRA: 1 = best, 0 = worst). The combined efficacy/safety 
profile was reported via the novel Improved Bidimensional SUCRA score (IBiS: the 
higher the value the better the treatment). Data obtained from 12,136 COPD 
patients (79.50% LABA/LAMA FDCs vs. placebo; 20.50% direct comparison between 
different LABA/LAMA FDCs) were extracted from 22 studies published between 2013 
and 2019. The IBiS score showed the following rank of efficacy/safety profile: 
tiotropium/olodaterol 5/5 μg (area 66.83%) » glycopyrronium/indacaterol 
15.6/27.5 μg (area 40.43%)  >  umeclidinium/vilanterol 62.5/25 μg (area 30.48%) 
 ≈  aclidinium/formoterol 400/12 μg (area 28.44%)  >  glycopyrronium/indacaterol 
50/110 μg (area 19.95%)  >  glycopyrronium/formoterol 14.4/9.6 μg (area 11.50%). 
Each available LABA/LAMA FDC has a specific efficacy/safety profile that needs 
to be considered for personalized therapy in COPD. Head-to-head studies aimed to 
assess the impact of different LABA/LAMA FDCs on the risk of COPD exacerbation 
are needed to further improve the information provided by this quantitative 
synthesis.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101841
PMID: 31520718


540. Lung. 2020 Feb;198(1):143-150. doi: 10.1007/s00408-019-00314-4. Epub 2020 Jan 1.

Point of Care Portable Spirometry in the Diagnosis and Treatment of Inpatients 
with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Tran D(1)(2), Lim M(2), Vogrin S(1), Jayaram L(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine, Respiratory & Sleep Disorders, Western Health, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(3)The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. 
lata.jayaram@unimelb.edu.au.
(4)Department of Medicine, Respiratory & Sleep Disorders, Western Health, 
Melbourne, Australia. lata.jayaram@unimelb.edu.au.

INTRODUCTION: Spirometry is required to accurately diagnose chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Following an acute exacerbation, it is recommended 
that spirometry be performed after a delay of 4-6 weeks to allow stability and a 
measure of 'baseline' lung function. However, poor attendance at these 
appointments can occur, leading to an inability to confirm the diagnosis of COPD 
or assess the severity of airflow obstruction. Portable spirometry (PS) is a 
proven surrogate device that may provide a convenient method to address these 
issues. The purpose of this study was to compare PS values, obtained prior to 
hospital discharge to laboratory-based spirometry (LS) results undertaken 
4 weeks later.
METHODS: Thirty-three eligible inpatients with a clinically determined 
exacerbation of COPD were recruited. Patients underwent PS prior to discharge 
and LS 4 weeks later.
RESULTS: Reliability of PS values at discharge compared with outpatient LS 
4 weeks later was excellent (intraclass correlation coefficient > 0.9). The PS 
confirmed a new diagnosis of COPD at the bedside in 29% of patients and excluded 
COPD in 6% at both time points. Patients were found to have a similar severity 
of airflow obstruction on both PS and LS, with clinical stability maintained 
between visits. The PS and LS may be used interchangeably for earlier diagnosis 
of COPD. PS at the point of discharge from hospital offers a unique opportunity 
to diagnose and facilitate COPD management from hospital to primary care.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-019-00314-4
PMID: 31894409


541. Rev Clin Esp. 2019 Dec;219(9):494-504. doi: 10.1016/j.rce.2019.03.006. Epub 2019 
Apr 26.

Consensus for managing patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
according to the CODEX index.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Boixeda R(1), Díez-Manglano J(2), Gómez-Antúnez M(3), López-García F(4), Recio 
J(5), Almagro P(6).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital de Mataró, Mataró, Barcelona, España.
(2)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, 
España.
(3)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio 
Marañón, Madrid, España.
(4)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital General de Elche, Elche, Alicante, 
España.
(5)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, España.
(6)Unidad de paciente crónico complejo, Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital 
Universitari Mútua de Terrassa, Terrassa, Barcelona, España. Electronic address: 
19908pam@comb.cat.

The comorbidity, obstruction, dyspnoea, exacerbations (CODEX) index is the first 
multicomponent scale designed to predict the risk of readmissions and mortality 
at 1 year for patients hospitalised for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). The index includes the comorbidities (C) (measured by the Charlson 
index), the degree of obstruction (O) (assessed by the forced expiratory volume 
in 1 second percentage), dyspnoea (D) (stratified according to the modified 
Medical Research Council scale) and exacerbations (EX) in the previous year. Our 
objective was to prepare recommendations based on the index's various components 
for personalised therapeutic management. To this end, we performed a literature 
search based on guidelines, consensuses and systematic reviews, as a basis for 
preparing recommendations on basic concepts, comorbidities, dyspnoea, pulmonary 
obstruction, exacerbations and follow-up. The recommendations were then 
subjected to an external assessment process by a multidisciplinary group of 62 
experts. In total, 108 recommendations were created, 96 of which achieved 
consensus, including the recommendation that COPD be considered a high-risk 
cardiovascular disease, as well as several specific recommendations on managing 
the various comorbidities. A consensus was reached on the recommended treatments 
in the guidelines for the various levels of obstruction, dyspnoea and 
exacerbations, adapted to the CODEX scores. Advice is also offered for patient 
follow-up after hospital discharge, which includes aspects on assessment, 
treatment and care coordination.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier España, S.L.U. and Sociedad Española de Medicina 
Interna (SEMI). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rce.2019.03.006
PMID: 31030885


542. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Apr 14;15:745-754. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S242767. eCollection 2020.

The Effect of Baseline Rescue Medication Use on Efficacy and Safety of Nebulized 
Glycopyrrolate Treatment in Patients with COPD from the GOLDEN 3 and 4 Studies.

Donohue JF(1), Ozol-Godfrey A(2), Goodin T(2), Sanjar S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., Marlborough, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 May 26;15:1177.

PURPOSE: Rescue medication use is common in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) patients and tends to increase with symptoms and disease 
severity. An analysis of baseline rescue medication use was conducted to inform 
on patient phenotypes and subsequent effects on lung function, symptoms, and 
safety following 12 weeks of nebulized glycopyrrolate (GLY) 25 µg twice daily or 
placebo in patients with moderate-to-very-severe COPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Pooled data from the 12-week, placebo-controlled GOLDEN 3 
and 4 studies (n=781) were used to assign patients into quarters based on 
baseline rescue medication use (ie, average puffs-per-day) during the run-in 
period. Placebo-adjusted trough forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), St. 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total score and EXAcerbations of COPD 
Tool-Respiratory Symptoms (EXACT-RS) total score data were reported; safety was 
evaluated by reviewing the incidence of adverse events (AEs) and serious AEs 
(SAEs).
RESULTS: Baseline rescue medication use was a proxy for disease severity, 
evidenced by decreased lung function, increased health status scores, symptom 
scores and use of background long-acting β2-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids 
across quarters and treatment groups. Treatment with GLY led to greater 
improvements from baseline in trough FEV1, SGRQ and EXACT-RS scores compared 
with placebo in all rescue medication use quarters. Additionally, the SGRQ and 
EXACT-RS exhibited greater improvement with increased baseline rescue medication 
use with GLY treatment. In the Q4 patients, SGRQ (≥4-unit reduction) or EXACT-RS 
(≥2-unit reduction) responders were significantly greater with GLY compared with 
placebo. AE and SAE incidences were similar across quartiles.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that baseline rescue medication use 
assessments may be useful in the management of COPD. Treatment with nebulized 
GLY improved lung function and symptom scores, regardless of baseline rescue 
medication use. These results support the use of nebulized GLY for the treatment 
of COPD, independent of baseline rescue medication use.

© 2020 Donohue et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S242767
PMCID: PMC7166066
PMID: 32341641

Conflict of interest statement: JFD has been an advisor and received personal 
fees from Sunovion and Mylan, and has served on advisory boards for Theravance. 
AO-G, TG, and SS are employees of Sunovion Pharmaceuticals, Inc. The authors 
report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


543. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Mar 18;15:605-611. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S243429. eCollection 2020.

The Bronchiectasis in COPD-OSA Overlap Syndrome Patients.

Yang X(1), Tang X(1), Cao Y(1), Dong L(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang J(1), Cao J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tianjin Medical 
University General Hospital, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: COPD-OSA (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease-obstructive sleep 
apnea) overlap syndrome is associated with more frequent COPD acute 
exacerbations than COPD without OSA. With the application of high-resolution 
computed tomography (HRCT) in COPD, bronchiectasis is commonly detected and is 
associated with disease severity. Sleep respiratory disease is also associated 
with bronchiectasis; however, the correlation between OSA and coexisted 
bronchiectasis in COPD (COPD-Bx) has not been reported yet.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 124 consecutive patients with stable COPD were 
enrolled. All subjects completed the chest HRCT and nocturnal polysomnography 
(PSG). The scores of extent and severity in bronchiectasis were assessed based 
on the Smith method and the Bhalla scoring system. Clinical data, questionnaire, 
routine blood test data, blood levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) and 
Immunoglobulin E, and the lymphocyte subtype were collected.
RESULTS: Among all enrolled patients, 56.45% (70/124) were diagnosed as COPD-OSA 
based on the results of PSG screening. Bronchiectasis was detected in 42.86% 
(30/70) of the patients with COPD-OSA, but in 18.52% (10/54) of the patients 
without OSA (χ2=8.264, p=0.004). PSG screening revealed that COPD with OSA had a 
significantly higher apnea-hypopnea index and percent of time spent with oxygen 
saturation below 90% (T90). Higher values of CRP, T90, and lower CD4/CD8 in the 
COPD-Bx with OSA were detected compared to COPD-Bx without OSA. Correlation 
analysis showed that the Bhalla severity score was related to CD8 cell count 
(r=0.446, p<0.05) and CD4/CD8 (r=-0.357, p<0.05) in all the COPD-Bx patients. 
The Smith extent score was also associated with the values of CD8 count 
(r=0.388, p<0.05) and CD4/CD8 (r=-0.381, p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The comorbid bronchiectasis was more common in COPD-OSA overlap 
syndrome patient and may be related to more severe hypoxia and increased 
systemic inflammation.

© 2020 Yang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S243429
PMCID: PMC7090178
PMID: 32256061

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


544. Eur Respir J. 2019 May 18;53(5):1900235. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00235-2019. Print 
2019 May.

Extrafine triple therapy in patients with symptomatic COPD and history of 
one moderate exacerbation.

Singh D(1), Fabbri LM(2)(3), Corradi M(4), Georges G(5), Guasconi A(6), Vezzoli 
S(6), Petruzzelli S(6), Papi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester University 
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(2)Section of Cardiorespiratory and Internal Medicine, Dept of Medical Sciences, 
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)COPD Center, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Dept Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(5)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi USA, Inc., Cary, NC, USA.
(6)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.

In patients with symptomatic COPD, severe/very severe airflow limitation, and a 
history of one moderate (and no severe) exacerbation, ICS-containing triple 
therapy significantly reduces exacerbation risk overall versus single or double 
maintenance therapy http://ow.ly/VgJC30o9pXC

In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), exacerbation history is the 
strongest predictor of future exacerbation risk [1, 2]. Large cohort studies 
have shown that patients with one exacerbation in the previous year have an 
approximately two-fold increased future exacerbation risk compared to patients 
with no exacerbations, the risk increasing to five-fold in those with two or 
more exacerbations [1, 2]. Most clinical trials of pharmacological treatments 
designed to prevent exacerbations have therefore used the inclusion criterion of 
at least one exacerbation in the previous year, with a minority requiring at 
least two exacerbations [3–6].

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00235-2019
PMCID: PMC6853799
PMID: 30792343

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: D. Singh reports personal 
fees from Chiesi, during the conduct of these studies; grants and personal fees 
from Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Glenmark, Johnson and Johnson, Merck, NAPP, Novartis, Pfizer, Takeda, Teva, 
Theravance and Verona, personal fees from Genentech and Skeypharma, outside the 
submitted work. Conflict of interest: L.M. Fabbri reports personal fees and 
non-financial support from AstraZeneca, GSK, Novartis, Menarini, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Zambon and Pearl Therapeutics, grants, personal fees and 
non-financial support from Chiesi, non-financial support from Dompe, outside the 
submitted work. Conflict of interest: M. Corradi reports grants and personal 
fees from Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, outside the submitted work. Conflict of 
interest: G. Georges was an employee of Chiesi USA, Inc., during the conduct of 
these studies. Conflict of interest: A. Guasconi was an employee of Chiesi 
Farmaceutici S.p.A, during the conduct of these studies. Conflict of interest: 
S. Vezzoli was an employee of Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A, during the conduct of 
these studies. Conflict of interest: S. Petruzzelli was an employee of Chiesi 
Farmaceutici S.p.A, during the conduct of these studies. Conflict of interest: 
A. Papi reports fees for board membership, consultancy, payment for lectures, 
grants for research and travel expenses reimbursement from Chiesi, AstraZeneca, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Mundipharma and TEVA, fees for lectures 
and travel expenses reimbursement from Menarini, Novartis and Zambon, grants for 
research from Sanofi, outside the submitted work.


545. Respir Med. 2019 Sep;156:8-14. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.07.023. Epub 2019 Jul 
26.

Trends over time in COPD treatment choices by respiratory physicians: An 
analysis from the COLIBRI-COPD French cohort.

Roche N(1), Aguilaniu B(2), Zhi Li P(3), Hess D(4); COLIBRI collaborators.

Author information:
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Centre, Hôpital Cochin, 
AP-HP and Université Paris Descartes (UMR1016, Institut Cochin), Sorbonne Paris 
Cite, 27 Rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014, Paris, France. Electronic 
address: nicolas.roche@aphp.fr.
(2)Programme Colibri, Association pour la complémentarité des connaissances et 
des pratiques de la pneumologie (aCCPP), 19 avenue Marcelin Berthelot, 38100, 
Grenoble, France; Université Grenoble Alpes, Faculté de médecine et pharmacie, 
23 Avenue Maquis du Grésivaudan, 38700, La Tronche, France. Electronic address: 
b.aguilaniu@me.com.
(3)Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit, Research Institute of 
the McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, 5252, boul. de 
Maisonneuve Ouest, Montreal, QC H4a 3s5, Canada. Electronic address: 
pei.li@mail.mcgill.ca.
(4)Programme Colibri, Association pour la complémentarité des connaissances et 
des pratiques de la pneumologie (aCCPP), 19 avenue Marcelin Berthelot, 38100, 
Grenoble, France. Electronic address: david.hess@colibri-pneumo.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Over the last decade, new evidence and many guidelines have been 
published on COPD pharmacological treatments; prescriptions are often not in 
accordance with guidelines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Trends in physician treatment choices from February 2012 
to November 2018 (Feb.2012/Nov.2018) were analyzed using data from COPD patients 
(spirometry-confirmed diagnosis) included in the COLIBRI-COPD cohort. Inhaled 
drug treatments (short- or long-acting β2-agonist [SABA or LABA], short- or 
long-acting anticholinergic [SAMA or LAMA], or corticosteroid [ICS]) were 
classified into 5 treatment categories: "No initial maintenance treatment (IMT)" 
(untreated, or only SAMA or SABA); "1 long-acting bronchodilator (LABD)" (LABA 
or LAMA); "2 LABDs" (LABA + LAMA); "1 LABD + ICS" (LABA or LAMA + ICS); "2 
LABDs + ICS" (LABA + LAMA + ICS). For the purpose of the study, 4 periods were 
defined to achieve balanced samples (T1-T4).
RESULTS: Data from 4537 patients were collected. Over time, 3 major changes were 
observed: (1) an increase in treatment category "No IMT", mostly for GOLD 1 or 
GOLD A categories (GOLD A: from 19.1% at T1 to 41.2% at T4); (2) an increase in 
treatment category "2 LABDs" for GOLD 2 to 4 and GOLD A to D categories (GOLD B: 
from 15.4% to 29.7%); (3) a decrease in ICS use ("1 LABD + ICS" or "2 
LABDs + ICS"), mostly for GOLD 1 to 3 and GOLD A categories (GOLD A, 2 
LABDs + ICS: from 35.3% to 11.1%).
CONCLUSION: Changes over time in therapeutic profiles suggest that new evidence 
from scientific publications and recommendations may have had a rapid impact on 
clinical practice.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.07.023
PMID: 31374262


546. COPD. 2019 Dec;16(5-6):344-353. doi: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1682535. Epub 2019 
Nov 4.

Phase II Study of Single/Repeated Doses of Acumapimod (BCT197) to Treat Acute 
Exacerbations of COPD.

Strâmbu IR(1), Kobalava ZD(2), Magnusson BP(3), MacKinnon A(4), Parkin JM(4).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Pneumology "Marius Nasta", Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, RUDN University, Moscow, Russia.
(3)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Mereo BioPharma Group plc, London, UK.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 is a key regulator in the inflammation 
pathway and is activated in the lungs of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) patients. Acumapimod is a potent, selective, oral, p38 inhibitor under 
investigation for treatment of acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD). In this 
Phase II, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled dose-exploration study of 
acumapimod in patients with moderate or severe AECOPD (NCT01332097), patients 
presenting with AECOPD were randomized to receive single-dose acumapimod (20 mg 
or 75 mg) on Day 1, repeated single-dose acumapimod (20 mg or 75 mg) on Days 1 
and 6, oral prednisone 40 mg (10 days), or placebo. Primary outcome: improvement 
in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) versus placebo at Day 5 (single doses) 
and Day 10 (repeated doses). N = 183 patients were randomized; 169 (92%) 
patients completed the study. Although the primary endpoint (FEV1 at Day 10) was 
not met (p = 0.082), there was a significant improvement in FEV1 with acumapimod 
repeat-dose 75 mg versus placebo at Day 8 (p = 0.022) which, though not a 
prespecified endpoint, was part of an overall trend. Differences at lower doses 
did not achieve significance. Mean change in FEV1 AUC from baseline to Day 14 in 
the 75 mg repeat-dose group was significantly higher versus placebo (p = 0.02), 
prednisone (p = 0.01), and 20 mg single-dose groups (p = 0.015) (post-hoc 
analysis). EXACT-PRO showed numerical differences versus placebo that did not 
reach significance. Acumapimod was well tolerated. In conclusion, repeated 
single-dose acumapimod showed a clinically relevant improvement in FEV1 over 
placebo at Day 8, along with consistent numerical differences in EXACT-PRO. 
These data can be used to determine dose regimens for a 
proof-of-clinical-concept trial.

DOI: 10.1080/15412555.2019.1682535
PMID: 31682162


547. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Nov 29;14:2697-2709. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S222195. eCollection 2019.

Erythromycin Prevents Elastin Peptide-Induced Emphysema and Modulates CD4(+)T 
Cell Responses in Mice.

Tang S(#)(1), Ma T(#)(1), Zhang H(#)(1), Zhang J(1), Zhong X(1), Tan C(1), Qiu 
Y(1), Zeng W(1), Feng X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Afﬁliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Elastin peptides (EP) can induce lung inflammation and emphysema. 
Erythromycin has been shown to decrease acute exacerbation frequency and delay 
lung function decline in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients and 
ameliorate emphysema in murine models; however, the mechanism remains unclear. 
We aimed to observe the preventive and immunomodulatory effects of erythromycin 
in a mouse model of EP-induced emphysema.
METHODS: In the in vivo study, Balb/c mice were treated with EP intranasally on 
day 0, and then administered erythromycin (100 mg/kg) or vehicle orally on day 
1, which was continued every other day. Mice exposed to cigarette smoke were 
used as an emphysema positive control. The severity of emphysema and 
inflammation in the lungs of EP-exposed mice with or without erythromycin 
treatment were observed on day 40 after EP administration. In the in vitro 
study, naïve CD4+T cells were isolated from healthy mice spleens and stimulated 
by EP with or without erythromycin incubation. Flow cytometry was used to 
measure the proportions of Th1, Th17, and Treg cells. ELISA was used to detect 
cytokine levels of IFN-γ, IL-17, IL-6, and TGF-β. Transcript levels of Ifnγ, 
IL17a, and Foxp3 were evaluated by qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: After exposure to EP, Th1 and Th17 cell percentages and the levels of 
inflammatory cytokines increased in vivo and in vitro, while Treg cells 
decreased in vivo. Erythromycin reduced IFN-γ, IL-17, IL-6 inflammatory 
cytokines, MLI, and the inflammation score in the lungs of EP-exposed mice. In 
vitro, erythromycin also limited Th17 and Th1 cell differentiation and 
downregulated transcript levels of Ifnγ and IL17a in the EP-stimulated CD4+T 
cells.
CONCLUSION: The Th1 and Th17 cell responses were increased in EP-induced 
emphysema. Prophylactic use of erythromycin effectively ameliorated emphysema 
and modulated CD4+T cells responses in EP-induced lung inflammation in mice.

© 2019 Tang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S222195
PMCID: PMC6890220
PMID: 31819402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


548. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2020 Jan;7(1):26-37. doi: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.1.2019.0135.

Assessment of the COPD Assessment Test Within U.S. Primary Care.

Stanford RH(1), Tabberer M(2), Kosinski M(3), Johnson PT(3), White J(3), Carlyle 
M(3), Tillery NA(1).

Author information:
(1)U.S. Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina.
(2)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Uxbridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Optum, Eden Prairie, Minnesota.

RATIONALE: Uptake of the COPD Assessment Test (CATTM) is not yet widespread in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) within U.S. primary 
care and its alignment with other assessments has not been evaluated in U.S. 
clinical practice.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the alignment of the CAT with other standard measures of 
COPD severity and its usability in a U.S. primary care population.
METHODS: This was a multicenter, prospective, observational, longitudinal study 
of patients with COPD and their primary care physicians. Patients with 
spirometry-confirmed airflow restriction completed a daily electronic diary 
(eDiary) over 12 weeks; surveys were also administered at baseline and at 6- and 
12-week follow-up.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In the study population (n=178), statistically 
significant differences (P<0.05) were found across 4 CAT impact score groups 
where at all time points patients in the Low Impact CAT score group had superior 
lung function and physical/mental health status than patients in the Medium, 
High, and Very High Impact groups. Numerical, though lesser, differences were 
also found across these latter 3 groups. Furthermore, the average total 
EXAcerbations of COPD Tool (EXACT®) score was significantly worse in patients in 
the highest CAT score group over the first 7 days.
CONCLUSIONS: COPD severity; respiratory symptoms; frequency, severity, and 
duration of pulmonary exacerbations; and overall physical and mental health 
status are linked concurrently and prospectively to CAT impact score categories. 
The stratification of patients according to CAT impact scores, and application 
of clinical and functional health status information to these categories, 
enhances the usability of the CAT in practice settings for COPD management.

JCOPDF © 2020.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.1.2019.0135
PMCID: PMC7182383
PMID: 31999900

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following conflicts of 
interest during the last 3 years in relation to this article: RHS was formerly, 
and MT and NAT are employees of and own shares in GlaxoSmithKline plc. MK, PTJ, 
JW, and MC are employees of and own shares in Optum plc. Optum plc received 
funding from GlaxoSmithKline plc to conduct this study, but were not paid for 
manuscript development. This study was funded by GlaxoSmithKline plc (GSK study 
HO-14-14653/204942). GlaxoSmithKline plc was involved in the design of this 
study, the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data, the writing of this 
manuscript and the decision to submit for publication.


549. Version 2. Respir Res. 2020 Mar 30;21(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s12931-020-01340-0.

Microbial burden and viral exacerbations in a longitudinal multicenter COPD 
cohort.

Bouquet J(1), Tabor DE(2), Silver JS(3), Nair V(2), Tovchigrechko A(4), Griffin 
MP(3), Esser MT(5), Sellman BR(5), Jin H(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology & Safety Sciences, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, 
South San Francisco, USA. jerome.bouquet@astrazeneca.com.
(2)Clinical Pharmacology & Safety Sciences, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, 
South San Francisco, USA.
(3)Respiratory Inflammation and Autoimmunity, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, 
AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, USA.
(4)Data Science and AI, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, USA.
(5)Microbial Sciences, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a heterogeneous 
disease characterized by frequent exacerbation phenotypes independent of disease 
stage. Increasing evidence shows that the microbiota plays a role in disease 
progression and severity, but long-term and international multicenter assessment 
of the variations in viral and bacterial communities as drivers of exacerbations 
are lacking.
METHODS: Two-hundred severe COPD patients from Europe and North America were 
followed longitudinally for 3 years. We performed nucleic acid detection for 20 
respiratory viruses and 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing to evaluate the 
bacterial microbiota in 1179 sputum samples collected at stable, acute 
exacerbation and follow-up visits.
RESULTS: Similar viral and bacterial taxa were found in patients from the USA 
compared to Bulgaria and Czech Republic but their microbiome diversity was 
significantly different (P < 0.001) and did not impact exacerbation rates. Virus 
infection was strongly associated with exacerbation events (P < 5E-20). Human 
rhinovirus (13.1%), coronavirus (5.1%) and influenza virus (3.6%) constitute the 
top viral pathogens in triggering exacerbation. Moraxella and Haemophilus were 
5-fold and 1.6-fold more likely to be the dominating microbiota during an 
exacerbation event. Presence of Proteobacteria such as Pseudomonas or 
Staphylococcus amongst others, were associated with exacerbation events 
(OR > 0.17; P < 0.02) but more strongly associated with exacerbation frequency 
(OR > 0.39; P < 4E-10), as confirmed by longitudinal variations and biotyping of 
the bacterial microbiota, and suggesting a role of the microbiota in sensitizing 
the lung.
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights bacterial taxa in lung sensitization and 
viral triggers in COPD exacerbations. It provides a global overview of the 
diverse targets for drug development and explores new microbiome analysis 
methods to guide future patient management applications.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-020-01340-0
PMCID: PMC7104712
PMID: 32228581

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are employees and share holders of 
AstraZeneca.


550. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2019 Oct 23;6(4):297-307. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.6.4.2019.0127.

Exacerbations, Health Resource Utilization, and Costs Among Medicare 
Beneficiaries with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Treated with Nebulized 
Arformoterol Following a Respiratory Event.

Navaie M(1)(2), Celli BR(3), Xu Z(4), Cho-Reyes S(1), Dembek C(5), Gilmer TP(4).

Author information:
(1)Advance Health Solutions, New York, New York.
(2)School of Professional Studies, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(3)Harvard Medical School and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Center, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Family Medicine and Public Health, Division of Health Policy, 
University of California San Diego, La Jolla.
(5)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., Marlborough, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Long-acting beta2-agonists (LABAs), with or without inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICSs), delivered by handheld inhalers or nebulizers are 
recommended as maintenance therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). This study evaluated exacerbations, health resource utilization (HRU), 
and costs among Medicare beneficiaries with COPD on handheld ICS+LABA who 
switched to nebulized arformoterol (ARF) or continued ICS+LABA following a 
respiratory event.
METHODS: Using Medicare claims, we identified beneficiaries with COPD 
(international classification of disease, 9th revision, clinical modification 
[ICD-9-CM] 490-492.xx, 494.xx, 496.xx) between 2010-2014 who had ≥ 1 year of 
continuous enrollment in Parts A, B, and D; ≥ 2 COPD-related outpatient visits ≥ 
30 days apart or ≥ 1 hospitalization(s); ICS+LABA use 90-days before ARF 
initiation; and a respiratory event (COPD-related hospitalization or emergency 
department [ED] visit < 30 days before ARF initiation). Using propensity scores, 
423 beneficiaries who switched to ARF were matched to 423 beneficiaries who 
continued on handheld ICS+LABA (controls). Difference-in-difference regression 
models examined outcomes at 180-days follow-up.
RESULTS: Beneficiaries who switched to ARF had 1.5 fewer exacerbations (p=0.015) 
but no difference in hospitalizations and ED visits compared to controls. 
Durable medical equipment (DME) costs were higher among ARF users than controls 
($1590), yet total health care costs were similar due to cost offsets by ARF in 
pharmacy (-$794), inpatient (-$524), and outpatient care (-$65). ARF accounted 
for 55% ($886.63) of DME costs, with the remaining costs attributed to oxygen 
therapy ($428.10) and nebulized corticosteroids ($590.85).
CONCLUSIONS: Switching from handheld ICS+LABA to nebulized ARF resulted in fewer 
COPD exacerbations among Medicare beneficiaries. Nebulized LABAs may improve 
outcomes in selected patients with COPD.

JCOPDF © 2019.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.6.4.2019.0127
PMCID: PMC7006702
PMID: 31483988

Conflict of interest statement: MN and SC are employed by Advance Health 
Solutions, LLC which received funding from Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc., to 
oversee this study. BRC received consultation remuneration as a member of the 
Medical Advisory Board at Advance Health Solutions, LLC. He has also been an 
expert pulmonologist consultant for GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Astra 
Zeneca, Novartis, and Pulmonix. ZX and TPG are employed by the University of 
California San Diego which received a grant from Advance Health Solutions, LLC, 
to implement this retrospective study. CD is employed by Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals Inc.


551. Respir Med. 2019 Aug;155:141-147. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.07.021. Epub 2019 Jul 
25.

Prognosis of COPD depends on severity of exacerbation history: A 
population-based analysis.

Çolak Y(1), Afzal S(1), Marott JL(2), Nordestgaard BG(1), Vestbo J(3), 
Ingebrigtsen TS(4), Lange P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark; The Copenhagen General Population Study, 
Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, and the 
Copenhagen City Heart Study, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark; Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)The Copenhagen General Population Study, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, and the Copenhagen City Heart Study, 
Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, School of 
Biological Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of 
Manchester, And Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
(4)The Copenhagen General Population Study, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, and the Copenhagen City Heart Study, 
Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark; Medical Unit, Respiratory Section, Hvidovre Hospital, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, Hvidovre, Denmark.
(5)The Copenhagen General Population Study, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, and the Copenhagen City Heart Study, 
Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark; Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Public Health, Section of 
Epidemiology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of 
Internal Medicine, Section of Respiratory Medicine, Herlev and Gentofte 
Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark. Electronic address: 
peter.lange@sund.ku.dk.

BACKGROUND: Differences in previous exacerbation history may influence prognosis 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We hypothesized that prognosis 
differs between individuals with a history of only medically treated 
exacerbations (moderate exacerbations) and those with a history of hospitalised 
exacerbations (severe exacerbations).
METHODS: We included 98 614 adults from the Copenhagen General Population Study 
and assessed risk of moderate and severe exacerbations, pneumonia 
hospitalisation, and respiratory and all-cause mortality from 2003 until 2013 
according to exacerbation history.
RESULTS: Among 6545 individuals with COPD, 6290 had no exacerbations in the 
preceding year, 109 had one moderate exacerbation, 108 had two or more moderate 
exacerbations, and 38 had one or more severe exacerbations. During 9.4 years of 
follow-up, we observed 926 moderate and 244 severe exacerbations, 477 
pneumonias, and 707 deaths, including 69 from respiratory disease. Compared to 
individuals without previous exacerbations, lung function and symptom adjusted 
hazard ratios (HRs) for future moderate exacerbation were 4.68 (95% confidence 
interval:3.31-6.62) for individuals with one previous moderate exacerbation, 21 
(13-33) for individuals with two or more previous moderate exacerbations, and 
5.30 (3.44-8.15) for individuals with one or more previous severe exacerbations. 
Corresponding HRs were 1.62(0.78-3.34), 1.29(0.57-2.89), and 5.43 (2.56-12) for 
severe exacerbation, 1.86(1.06-3.27), 1.74(1.01-2.99), and 4.85 (2.94-8.02) for 
pneumonia, 0.53(0.10-2.99), 1.65(0.53-5.17), and 2.98 (1.14-7.83) for 
respiratory mortality, and 1.34(0.79-2.29), 1.57(1.00-2.47), and 1.49 
(0.85-2.62) for all-cause mortality, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Individuals with COPD and a history of hospitalised exacerbations 
carried the poorest prognosis compared to those with a history of only medically 
treated exacerbations, suggesting difference in risk profile.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.07.021
PMID: 31362177


552. Minerva Anestesiol. 2020 Feb;86(2):172-180. doi: 10.23736/S0375-9393.19.13732-7. 
Epub 2019 Dec 4.

Regional air trapping in acute exacerbation of obstructive lung diseases 
measured with electrical impedance tomography: a feasibility study.

Zhao Z(1)(2), Chang MY(3), Frerichs I(4), Zhang JH(3), Chang HT(3), Gow 
CH(5)(6), Möller K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Fourth Military Medical University, 
Xi'an, China.
(2)Institute of Technical Medicine, Furtwangen University, 
Villingen-Schwenningen, Germany.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei 
City, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical 
Center of Schleswig-Holstein Campus, Kiel, Germany.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei 
City, Taiwan - gowchien@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Healthcare Information and Management, Ming-Chuan University, 
Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Comment in
    Minerva Anestesiol. 2020 Feb;86(2):124-125.

BACKGROUND: Since bronchial abnormalities often exhibit spatial non-uniformity 
which may be not correctly assessed by conventional global lung function 
measures, regional information may help to characterize the disease progress. We 
hypothesized that regional air trapping during mechanical ventilation could be 
characterized by regional end-expiratory flow (EEF) derived from electrical 
impedance tomography (EIT).
METHODS: Twenty-five patients suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD grade 3 or 4) or severe asthma with acute exacerbation were 
examined prospectively. Patients were ventilated under assist-control mode. EIT 
measurements were conducted before and one hour after inhaled combined 
corticosteroid and long-acting β2 agonist, on two consecutive days. Regional EEF 
was calculated as derivative of relative impedance for every image pixel in the 
lung regions. The results were normalized to global flow values measured by the 
ventilator.
RESULTS: Regional and global EEF were highly correlated (P<0.00001) and regional 
effects of medication and disease progression were visible in the regional EEF 
maps. The sums of regional EEF in lung regions were 3.8 [2.0, 5.1] and 3.6 [1.9, 
4.5] L/min in COPD patients before and after medication (median [lower, upper 
quartiles]; P=0.37). The corresponding values in asthma patients were 3.0 [2.5, 
4.2] and 2.2 [1.7, 3.2] L/min (P<0.05). Histograms of regional EEF showed high 
spatial heterogeneity of EEF before medication. After one day of treatment, the 
histograms exhibited less heterogeneous and a decrease in EEF level.
CONCLUSIONS: Regional EEF characterizes air trapping and intrinsic PEEP, which 
could provide diagnostic information for monitoring the disease progress during 
treatment.

DOI: 10.23736/S0375-9393.19.13732-7
PMID: 31808658


553. Am J Manag Care. 2020 May 1;26(5):e150-e154. doi: 10.37765/ajmc.2020.43157.

COPD exacerbation costs in the IMPACT study: a within-trial analysis.

Bogart MR(1), Hopson SD, Shih HC, Stanford RH, Coutinho AD.

Author information:
(1)US Value Evidence and Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline plc, 5 Moore Dr, Research 
Triangle Park, Durham, NC. Email: michael.r.bogart@gsk.com.

OBJECTIVES: Exacerbations account for the greatest proportion of costs 
associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Here we aimed to 
evaluate, from the US payer perspective, the costs associated with moderate and 
severe COPD exacerbation events for patients treated with fluticasone 
furoate/umeclidinium/vilanterol (FF/UMEC/VI) compared with FF/VI or UMEC/VI.
STUDY DESIGN: This post hoc, within-trial economic analysis used data derived 
from the InforMing the PAthway of COPD Treatment (IMPACT) study (NCT02164513).
METHODS: Treatment groups within the IMPACT trial received either triple therapy 
with FF/UMEC/VI (100/62.5/25 mcg) or dual therapy (FF/VI [100/25 mcg] or UMEC/VI 
[62.5/25 mcg]). The primary end point for this IMPACT post hoc analysis was cost 
differences between the treatment arms related to 1-year on-treatment combined 
moderate and severe COPD exacerbation events.
RESULTS: The final study sample for this within-trial analysis consisted of 
10,355 patients, 49% of whom experienced an on-treatment moderate or severe 
exacerbation during the study. The mean 1-year on-treatment cost estimate 
associated with combined moderate and severe exacerbations was highest with 
UMEC/VI and lowest with FF/UMEC/VI ($6205 vs $4913, respectively). Mean cost 
differences were statistically significant for all pairwise comparisons of 
FF/UMEC/VI with FF/VI or UMEC/VI (-$549 [95% CI, -$565 to -$533] and -$1292 [95% 
CI, -$1313 to -$1272], respectively; both P <.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with FF/UMEC/VI compared with FF/VI or UMEC/VI in the US 
healthcare system resulted in lower exacerbation-related costs for combined 
moderate/severe exacerbation events, as well as moderate and severe 
exacerbations separately.

DOI: 10.37765/ajmc.2020.43157
PMID: 32436683


554. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2019 Aug 1;12(8):2837-2848. eCollection 2019.

Long non-coding RNA NEAT1 predicts elevated chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) susceptibility and acute exacerbation risk, and correlates with 
higher disease severity, inflammation, and lower miR-193a in COPD patients.

Ming X(1), Duan W(2), Yi W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Geriatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology Wuhan, China.

This study aimed to explore the value of long non-coding RNA nuclear enriched 
abundant transcript 1 (lnc-NEAT1) in predicting chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) susceptibility and acute exacerbation risk, and to investigate 
the correlation of lnc-NEAT1 with disease severity, inflammation level, and 
miR-193a in COPD patients. 90 AECOPD patients, 90 stable COPD patients and 90 
healthy controls were consecutively recruited. Severity of airflow obstruction 
in COPD patients was defined by GOLD guidelines. Plasma samples were collected 
from all participants, then lnc-NEAT1 and miR-193a expressions were measured by 
qPCR, and TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-17 were measured by ELISA. Lnc-NEAT1 
expression was elevated in AECOPD patients and stable COPD patients compared to 
healthy controls, as well as in AECOPD patients compared to stable COPD 
patients; moreover, ROC curves showed that lnc-NEAT1 predicted increased COPD 
susceptibility and acute exacerbation risk of COPD. Also, lnc-NEAT1 expression 
positively correlated with GOLD stage and levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-17 
in both AECOPD and stable COPD patients. Furthermore, lnc-NEAT1 expression 
negatively correlated with miR-193a expression, and miR-193a could predict 
decreased COPD susceptibility and acute exacerbation risk, and negatively 
correlated with GOLD stage and levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-17 in both 
AECOPD and stable COPD patients. lnc-NEAT1 predicts elevated COPD susceptibility 
and increased acute exacerbation risk, and positively correlates with disease 
severity as well as inflammation, but negatively associates with miR-193a in 
COPD patients.

IJCEP Copyright © 2019.

PMCID: PMC6949709
PMID: 31934120

Conflict of interest statement: None.


555. Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020 Jul 2;52(4):148-159. doi: 
10.23822/EurAnnACI.1764-1489.138. Epub 2020 Jul 2.

Asthma and COPD "overlap": a treatable trait or common several treatable-traits?

Gaspar Marques J(1)(2), Lobato M(1), Leiria Pinto P(1)(2), Neuparth N(3)(2), 
Carreiro Martins P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Serviço de Imunoalergologia, Hospital de Dona Estefânia, Centro Hospitalar 
Universitário de Lisboa Central, E.P.E., Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)NOVA Medical School, Comprehensive Health Research Center (CHRC), Lisboa, 
Portugal.
(3)Serviço de Imunoalergologia, Hospital de Dona Estefânia, Centro Hospitalar 
Universitário de Lisboa Central, E.P.E., Lisboa, Portugall.

In the last years, disease classification of chronic respiratory diseases (CRD) 
has been vivaciously discussed and new concepts have been introduced, namely 
asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) overlap (ACO). 
Controversially the GOLD consensus document of 2020 considered that we should no 
longer refer to ACO, as they constitute two different diseases that may share 
some common traits and clinical features. The treatable traits approach has 
numerous strengths that are applicable to several levels of health care. In this 
paper we review the application of the treatable traits to CRD and describe in 
detail the ones already identified in patients with asthma and COPD. Treatable 
traits in CRD can be divided in pulmonary, extra-pulmonary and 
behavior/lifestyle risk factors. Patients with both asthma and COPD patients 
have clearly recognized treatable traits in all these subtopics but it is 
notorious the severe and frequent exacerbations, the associated cardiovascular 
disease and the low health related quality of life and productivity of these 
patients.

DOI: 10.23822/EurAnnACI.1764-1489.138
PMID: 32189486


556. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 26;14:2245-2256. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S214191. eCollection 2019.

Temporal Trends Of Pharmacologic Therapies For Patients With Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease In Alberta, Canada.

Tran DT(1)(2), Akpinar I(1), Mayers I(3), Makhinova T(2), Jacobs P(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Economics, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the trends in pharmacologic treatment for patients newly 
diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in Alberta, Canada.
METHODS: We linked Alberta health databases to identify patients aged ≥35 years 
with incident COPD between April 2010 and March 2017. Incident cases were 
defined as those who did not have a hospitalization or outpatient visit with 
COPD in the previous 2 years. Patients were categorized into two groups: 1) 
incident cases at a hospital and 2) incident cases at an outpatient clinic, and 
both were followed until death or being censored by 31 March 2018. Utilization 
of COPD medication for 30 days following incident event and adherence in 
maintenance therapy over time were reported.
RESULTS: The study included 33,169 patients with incident COPD (hospital: 9,089; 
outpatient: 24,080). In 18,666 (56.3%) patients starting medication within 30 
days of the incident event (2010: 52.7%; 2016: 56.6%; p=0.002), SABA (60.5%) and 
LABA/ICS (41.6%) were most commonly used. ICS (without LABA) was used in 14.2% 
and was used as monotherapy in 4.5% of patients. The proportion of patients who 
initiated any ICS was similar (hospital: 56.7%; outpatient: 55.7%; p=0.194) and 
decreased in both settings over time (p<0.001). Drug adherence during the first 
year after the incident event was 54.3%, higher among hospital patients (66.5% 
vs 48.9%; p<0.001), and improved over time (2010: 53.4%; 2016: 57.4%; p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: The initiation of and adherence to pharmacologic therapy for 
patients with COPD is low but improves over time. While SABA and LABA/ICS are 
most commonly used, ICS utilization decreases over time.

© 2019 Tran et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S214191
PMCID: PMC6769052
PMID: 31576120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The Lung Association - Ontario funded the 
research for this study with an unrestricted grant to the Institute of Health 
Economics (IHE). Dat T Tran and Ilke Akpinar are IHE employees. Dr Dat T Tran 
reports grants from Lung Association- Ontario, during the conduct of the study. 
Dr Ilke Akpinar reports grants from Lung Association - Ontario, during the 
conduct of the study. Dr Philip Jacobs reports grants from Lung Association - 
Ontario, during the conduct of the study; and grant from Boehringer Ingelheim to 
study COPD market. The authors report no other conflicts of interest to this 
work.


557. Clin Respir J. 2020 Feb;14(2):109-115. doi: 10.1111/crj.13107. Epub 2019 Dec 3.

Fatigue and health-related quality of life among patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease in China.

Yang Y(1)(2), Li Q(3), Mao J(2), Mao Z(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Health Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)School of Nursing, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science & 
Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China.
(4)Global Health Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

OBJECTIVES: Fatigue is an important yet ignored symptom of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). However, there is a paucity of literature from China 
on fatigue and its association with health-related quality of life (HRQoL) among 
COPD patients. The purpose of this study was to (a) evaluate fatigue of COPD 
inpatients in China and (b) explore the association between fatigue and HRQoL.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study recruited patients hospitalised for an acute 
exacerbation of COPD within one month from three general hospitals in central 
China. Disease severity, fatigue and HRQoL were assessed for all participants 
using COPD Assessment Test (CAT), 9-item Functional Assessment of Chronic 
Illness Therapy-Fatigue scale (FACIT-F) and 12-Item Short-Form Health Survey 
(SF-12v2).
RESULTS: A total of 210 COPD patients participated in the study between April 
2017 and January 2018, with an average age of 71.1 ± 12.2 years old. The overall 
prevalence of moderate to severe fatigue was 48.5%. A worse FACIT-F score was 
associated with worse CAT score (r = -0.74, P < 0.01; B = -0.70, P < 0.01) and 
worse SF-12v2 score (r = 0.77, P < 0.01; B = 0.66, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Almost half of the COPD patients experience moderate to severe 
fatigue. Patients with greater disease severity exhibited more severe fatigue 
and worse HRQoL. Fatigue symptom has a strongly negative effect on COPD 
patients' HRQoL, physical health and mental health. Health personnel is 
recommended to provide fatigue-related screening, counselling and health 
education, particularly for patients with moderate to severe COPD.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13107
PMID: 31729154


558. J Med Biochem. 2019 Jan 22;38(4):503-511. doi: 10.2478/jomb-2018-0050. 
eCollection 2019 Oct.

Serum Biomarkers in Patients with Stable and Acute Exacerbation of Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Comparative Study.

Şahin F(1), Koşar AF(1), Aslan AF(1), Yiğitbaş B(1), Uslu B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, University of Health Sciences/Yedikule Chest 
Disease and Thoracic Surgery Health Practice and Research Center, Istanbul, 
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Mean platelet volume (MPV), neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) and 
platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio (PLR) have all been investigated as novel 
inflammatory markers of cardiac and oncological diseases, while there is only a 
limited number of studies investigating these markers in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). In the present study we examine NLR, PLR; and other 
markers, such as eosinophil, MPV, plateletcrit (PCT), platelet distribution 
width (PDW), red cell distribution width (RDW), and C-reactive protein (CRP) in 
patients with stable and acute exacerbation of COPD.
METHODS: Stable COPD (Group 1, n=140), COPD with acute exacerbation (Group 2, 
n=110), and healthy controls (Group 3, n=50) were included in the study. 
Leukocyte, CRP, hemoglobin (HB), RDW, platelet, MPV, PCT, PDW, neutrophil, 
lymphocyte, eosinophil, NLR, and PLR were analyzed in all groups.
RESULTS: HB, leukocyte, platelet, neutrophil, eosinophil, MPV, PCT, CRP, NLR, 
and PLR were significantly higher, while the lymphocyte was lower in Group 1 
than in Group 3. Leukocyte, neutrophil, RDW, CRP, NLR, and PLR were 
significantly higher, while lymphocyte was lower in Group 2 than in Group 3. 
Leukocyte, neutrophil, RDW, CRP, NLR, and PLR were significantly higher, while 
HB, platelet, MPV, PCT, and lymphocyte were significantly lower in Group 2 than 
in Group 1. NLR and PLR increased significantly in patients with bronchiectasis 
when compared to those without in Group 1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study results suggest that NLR, PLR and RDW can be used as 
simple and cost-effective markers for the evaluation of severity of exacerbation 
and for predicting hospitalization and further exacerbations in patients with 
COPD.

Publisher: UVOD: Srednji nivo trombocita (MPV), odnos neutrofila i limfocita 
(NLR) i odnos trombocita i limfocita (PLR) su istraženi kao novi zapaljenski 
markeri srčanih i onkoloških bolesti. Međutim, postoji ograničen broj studija 
koje istražuju ove markere u hroničnoj opstruktivnoj bolesti pluća (HOBP). Cilj 
je bio da se ispitaju NLR, PLR i drugi markeri kao {to su eozinofili, MPV, 
trombociti (PCT), širina širenja trombocita (PDW), širina distribucije 
eritrocita (RDW), C-reaktivni protein (CRP) kod pacijenata sa stabilnim i 
akutnim pogoršanje HOBP.
METODE: Ispitivani su stabilna HOBP (grupa 1, n = 140), HOBP sa napadom (grupa 
2, n = 110), i zdrave kontrole (grupa 3, n = 50). U svim grupama analizirani su 
leukociti, CRP, hemoglobin (Hb), RDW, trombociti, MPV, PCT, PDW, neutrofili, 
limfociti, eozinofili, NLR, PLR.
REZULTATI: Hb, leukociti, trombociti, neutrofili, eozinofili, MPV, PCT, CRP, 
NLR, PLR bili su značajno veći, dok su limfociti bili manji u grupi 1 nego u 
grupi 3. Leukociti, neutrofili, RDW, CRP, NLR, PLR bili su znatno viši, dok su 
limfociti bili bio niži u grupi 2 nego u grupi 3. Leukociti, neutorfili, RDW, 
CRP, NLR, PLR bili su znatno viši, dok su Hb, trombociti, MPV, PCT, limfociti 
bili znatno niši u grupi 2 nego u grupi 1. NLR i PLR bili su značajno povećani 
kod pacijenata sa bronhiektazom u poređenju sa onima koji nisu u grupi 1.
ZAKLJUČAK: Zaključak: Naši rezultati istraživanja ukazuju na to da su NLR, PLR i 
RDW jednostavni i isplativi markeri za procenuozbiljnosti pogoršanja i 
predviđanja za hospitalizaciju i dalju procenu pogoršanja kod pacijenata sa 
HOBP.

DOI: 10.2478/jomb-2018-0050
PMCID: PMC6708295
PMID: 31496916

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Conflict of interest 
statement: The authors stated that they have no conflicts of interest regarding 
the publication of this article.


559. J Thorac Dis. 2019 Sep;11(Suppl 14):S1800-S1809. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2019.06.12.

Update on management of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Agrawal R(1)(2), Moghtader S(1)(2), Ayyala U(1)(2), Bandi V(1)(2), Sharafkhaneh 
A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Medical Care Line, 
Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major chronic debilitating 
condition with significant impact on quality of life, symptoms, comorbidity, 
health care utilization and longevity. The main pathophysiological hallmark of 
COPD is expiratory flow limitation which impairs the ability of respiratory 
system to adequately and properly ventilate. To be able to prognosticate and 
manage patients with COPD, various societies have developed classifications of 
disease severity. Current classification schemes combine three elements that 
include lung function, patient reported symptoms (shortness of breath) and 
frequency of exacerbations. Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD), an international guideline for diagnosis and management of COPD, started 
using this approach since the 2011 revision. Management according to this scheme 
has been developed and is in use. Comprehensive COPD management is multifaceted. 
It includes pharmacologic management, patient education, smoking cessation, 
influenza and pneumococcal vaccinations, depression and anxiety management, 
pulmonary rehabilitation, and if indicated, home oxygen therapy. The following 
chapter will review management recommendations currently in use for stable COPD. 
We intend to make the chapter to the point and practical and avoid an exhaustive 
review of the literature.

2019 Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.06.12
PMCID: PMC6783725
PMID: 31632757

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.


560. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Nov 13;14:2485-2496. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S207626. eCollection 2019.

Statistical Process Control Improves The Feasibility Of Remote Physiological 
Monitoring In Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Cooper CB(1), Sirichana W(1)(2), Neufeld EV(1), Taylor M(3), Wang X(4), Dolezal 
BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Exercise Physiology Research Laboratory, Departments of Medicine and 
Physiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)eResearch Technology Inc., Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Division of General Internal Medicine and Health Services Research, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) occur 
with increasing frequency as the disease progresses and account for poor health 
status, worse prognosis, and higher healthcare expenditure.
METHODS: We developed a networked system for remote physiological monitoring 
(RPM) at home and optimized it with statistical process control (SPC) with the 
goal of earlier detection of COPD exacerbations. We enrolled 17 patients with 
moderate to severe COPD with a mean (SD) age of 71.1 (7.2) years. We obtained 
daily symptom scores, treatment adherence and activity levels using a 
programmable device, and measured daily slow and forced spirometry (FEV1, FVC, 
PEF), inspiratory capacity (IC) and oxygenation (SpO2). To identify 
exacerbations, we developed rolling prediction intervals for FVC, FEV1, IC and 
SpO2 using SPC.
RESULTS: The time taken to perform daily monitoring was reduced from 12.7 (5.4) 
minutes to 6.5 (2.6) minutes through software refinements during the study. 
Adherence to forced and slow spirometry was 62.6% and 62.4%, respectively. The 
within-subject coefficients of variation for FEV1, PEF and IC were 12.2%, 16.2%, 
and 13.1%, respectively. Event rates per patient-year for exacerbations were: 
self-reported 0.42, 2/3 Anthonisen Criteria (AC) 0.42, modified AC 2.23, 
systemic corticosteroid use 0.56, and antibiotic use 0.56.
CONCLUSION: We successfully implemented a networked system for RPM of symptoms, 
treatment adherence, and physiology at home in patients with COPD. We 
demonstrated that SPC improves the feasibility of RPM in COPD patients which may 
increase the likelihood of detecting COPD exacerbations.

© 2019 Cooper et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S207626
PMCID: PMC6859075
PMID: 32009781

Conflict of interest statement: During this study, CBC received consulting fees 
from eResearch Technologies Inc (ERT) for serving as Medical Director of their 
Clinical Services Division, also reports grants from eResearch Technologies, 
personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, non-financial support from Equinox Fitness 
Clubs, personal fees from PulmonX, outside the submitted work. Mr Michael Taylor 
reports Previously employed by the company whose product was used in the 
investigation. This investigation was funded by ERT, Inc. The authors report no 
other conflicts of interest in this study.


561. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2020 Jun;76(6):795-805. doi: 10.1007/s00228-020-02853-9. 
Epub 2020 Apr 10.

Association of tiotropium use and the risk of adverse cardiovascular events in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials.

Yang M(1), Zhang Y(2), Cheng H(3), Xu Z(3), He J(4).

Author information:
(1)The Department of Pulmonary Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, No.37, Guo Xue Alley, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(2)Digestive System Department, Chengdu Second People's Hospital, Chengdu, 
China.
(3)The Second Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chengdu Second People's 
Hospital, Chengdu, China.
(4)The Department of Pulmonary Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, No.37, Guo Xue Alley, Chengdu, 610041, China. Jianqhe@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium have been recommended as first-line maintenance therapy 
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to reduce the frequency, 
duration, and severity of exacerbations and improve quality of life. Recently, 
it was reported that tiotropium use might link to cardiovascular risk in COPD 
patients. But it is controversial. We aimed to clarify the associations between 
tiotropium use and cardiovascular risk in patients with COPD.
METHODS: We searched PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, and Clinical Trials.gov 
to identify potentially relevant articles. We included randomized controlled 
trials of any inhaled tiotropium versus non-anticholinergic treatment for COPD, 
with reporting of cardiovascular events as an adverse event. We conducted 
meta-analyses by the Peto and Mantel-Haenszel approaches with corresponding 95% 
CIs.
RESULTS: Our work included 20 RCTs with more than 27,699 subjects. Pooled 
results indicated that tiotropium treatment did not increase the risk of 
cardiovascular events (Peto OR, 0.97, 95% CI, 0.84-1.12; I2 = 0%), overall 
mortality (RD, 0.00, 95% CI, - 0.00-0.01; I2 = 68%), and cardiovascular 
mortality (Peto OR, 1.58, 95% CI, 0.92-2.74; I2 = 0%) compared with controls. 
Then, subgroup analysis was performed according to the type of controls. The 
pooled results were consistent with the above (tiotropium vs LABA: Peto OR, 
0.98, 95% CI, 0.81-1.19; I2 = 17%) (tiotropium vs placebo: Peto OR, 0.92, 95% 
CI, 0.75-1.44; I2 = 15%). In addition, there was also no association between 
cardiovascular risk and duration of tiotropium treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled tiotropium does not increase the risk of cardiovascular 
events and cardiovascular mortality in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-020-02853-9
PMID: 32274526


562. Turk J Med Sci. 2020 Apr 9;50(2):337-345. doi: 10.3906/sag-1909-9.

Correlation of serum fatty acid binding protein-4 and interleukin-6 with airflow 
limitation and quality of life in stable and acute exacerbation of COPD.

Aslani MR(1)(2), Ghazaei Z(3), Ghobadi H(4).

Author information:
(1)Lung Inflammatory Diseases Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Ardabil 
University of Medical Sciences, Ardabil, Iran
(2)Neurogenic Inflammation Research Centre, Mashhad University of Medical 
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Ardabil University of Medical Sciences, Ardabil, Iran
(4)Internal Medicine Department (Pulmonary Division), Faculty of Medicine, 
Ardabil University of Medical Sciences, Ardabil, Iran

BACKGROUND/AIM: The serum fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP-4) level increases 
in chronic inflammatory diseases. The present study aimed to examine serum 
FABP-4 and interleukin (IL)-6 levels in patients with stable and acute 
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and the correlation 
of these markers with airflow limitation.
MATERIALS AND METHODSS: We measured serum FABP-4 and IL-6 levels in 60 COPD 
patients [30 stable COPD (SCOPD), and 30 acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD)], 
and 30 healthy subjects and compared them with airflow limitation according to 
the COPD stage in the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease (GOLD) criteria, peripheral O2 saturation (SpO2), and COPD Assessment 
Test (CAT) score. We also tested the association between serum FABP-4 levels and 
some characteristics of study parameters.
RESULTS: Both serum FABP-4 and IL-6 levels increased with increasing severity of 
GOLD grades in SCOPD (P < 0.01 for both) and AECOPD groups (P < 0.001 and P < 
0.01, respectively). It also increased in patients with AECOPD group compared 
with SCOPD group in GOLD grades I-II (P < 0.01) and GOLD grades III-IV (P < 
0.05). In addition, there was a significant positive correlation between serum 
FABP-4 level with IL-6, CAT score, and smoking history and inversely with FEV1 
and SpO2.
CONCLUSION: The study revealed that serum FABP-4 level was elevated with 
increasing GOLD grades in COPD patients, markedly in acute exacerbation phase. 
The increase was associated with elevated serum levels of IL-6 and severity of 
hypoxia. Thus, it seems that FABP-4 may be involved in the pathogenesis of COPD.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License.

DOI: 10.3906/sag-1909-9
PMCID: PMC7164746
PMID: 31905499

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that there is no 
conflict of interest.


563. Chin Med J (Engl). 2019 Mar 5;132(5):569-576. doi: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000000107.

Cathelicidin LL-37 restoring glucocorticoid function in smoking and 
lipopolysaccharide-induced airway inflammation in rats.

Weng JZ(1), Wang Y, Sun TY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Hospital, 
National Center of Gerontology, Beijing 100730, China.

BACKGROUND: Glucocorticoids have been widely used to treat patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Nevertheless, corticosteroid insensitivity 
is a major barrier to the effective treatment of COPD and its mechanism remains 
unclear. This study aimed to evaluate the effect of cathelicidin LL-37 on 
corticosteroid insensitivity in COPD rat model, and to explore the involved 
mechanisms.
METHODS: COPD model was established by exposing male Wistar rats to cigarette 
smoke combined with intratracheal instillation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS). 
Inhaled budesonide and LL-37 were consequently applied to COPD models separately 
or collectively to confirm the effects on inflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis 
factor [TNF]-α and transforming growth factor [TGF]-β) by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and lung tissue histopathological morphology. 
Expression of histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) and phosphorylation of Akt (p-AKT) 
in lung were also measured.
RESULTS: Briefly, COPD model rats showed an increased basal release of 
inflammatory cytokines (lung TNF-α: 45.7 ± 6.1 vs. 20.1 ± 3.8 pg/mL, P < 0.01; 
serum TNF-α: 8.9 ± 1.2 vs. 6.7 ± 0.5 pg/mL, P = 0.01; lung TGF-β: 122.4 ± 20.8 
vs. 81.9 ± 10.8 pg/mL, P < 0.01; serum TGF-β: 38.9 ± 8.5 vs. 20.6 ± 2.3 pg/mL, 
P < 0.01) and COPD related lung tissue histopathological changes, as well as 
corticosteroid resistance molecular profile characterized by an increase in 
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt (0.5 ± 0.1 fold of control vs. 0.2 ± 0.1 
fold of control, P = 0.04) and a decrease in HDAC2 expression and activity 
(expression: 13.1 ± 0.4 μmol/μg vs. 17.4 ± 1.1 μmol/μg, P < 0.01; activity: 
1.1 ± 0.1 unit vs. 1.4 ± 0.1 unit, P < 0.01), compared with control group. In 
addition, LL-37 enhanced the anti-inflammatory effect of budesonide in an 
additive manner. Treatment with combination of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and 
LL-37 led to a significant increase of HDAC2 expression and activity 
(expression: 15.7 ± 0.4 μmol/μg vs. 14.1 ± 0.9 μmol/μg, P < 0.01; activity: 
1.3 ± 0.1 unit vs. 1.0 ± 0.1 unit, P < 0.01), along with decrease of p-AKT 
compared to budesonide monotherapy (0.1 ± 0.0 fold of control vs. 0.3 ± 0.1 fold 
of control, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggested that LL-37 could improve the anti-inflammatory 
activity of budesonide in cigarette smoke and LPS-induced COPD rat model by 
enhancing the expression and activity of HDAC2. The mechanism of this function 
of LL-37 might involve the inhibition of PI3K/Akt pathway.

DOI: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000000107
PMCID: PMC6415994
PMID: 30741829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


564. J Thorac Dis. 2019 Apr;11(4):1379-1386. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2019.03.78.

Influence of comorbidities in long-term survival of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease patients.

Eroglu SA(1), Gunen H(1), Yakar HI(2), Yildiz E(1), Kavas M(1), Duman D(1).

Author information:
(1)Sureyyapasa Research and Training Center for Chest Diseases and Thoracic 
Surgery, Health Sciences University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul Medeniyet 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the leading 
causes of mortality and morbidity around the world, with comorbidities in COPD 
being common and having a negative effect on survival. We investigate the 
effects of comorbidities on long-term survival of COPD patients.
METHODS: The study included patients with COPD who were hospitalized with an 
exacerbation. The demographic characteristics, hematological and biochemical 
parameters, pulmonary function test parameters and comorbidities of the patients 
were obtained from the hospital database and patient records, and the mortality 
of the patients was assessed at two years. The parameters considered to be 
related to mortality were analyzed using the Cox regression method.
RESULTS: A total of 826 patients with COPD were included in the study, and the 
rate of patients with at least one comorbidity was 84.5%. The most common 
comorbidities were hypertension (n=394, 47.7%), heart failure (n=244, 29.5%) and 
DM (n=173, 20.9%). In a Cox regression analysis, the Charlson Comorbidity Index 
was strongly associated with mortality (P=0.000). In Kaplan-Meier analysis, a 
significant association was noted between the increasing number of comorbidities 
and long-term mortality, when compared to the patients without comorbidity 
(comorbidity numbers 1, 2 and ≥3; HR: 1.37, P=0.032, HR: 1.40, P=0.028 and HR: 
1.65, P=0.000, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Increasing number of comorbidities in COPD patients with severe 
exacerbation were found to negatively affect long-term survival. We consider 
both the evaluation and treatment of comorbidities to be important in the 
reduction of long-term mortality in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.03.78
PMCID: PMC6531698
PMID: 31179080

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.


565. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2020 Jan 27;90(1). doi: 10.4081/monaldi.2020.1155.

An atypical acute exacerbation of COPD due to Aspergillus fumigatus.

Tetikkurt C(1), Kubat B, Tetikkurt S, Karakas G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul 
Cerrahpasa University. tetikkurt@gmail.com.

A 64-year-old male with a history of stabile chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) presented with increasing dyspnea and sputum for the last two 
months. Complete blood count showed WBC 14x103/ml, Hgb: 14.2 g/dL and 
eosinophilia. Blood biochemistry was normal. Chest x-ray showed hyperlucency 
while thorax computed tomography (CT) revealed obstructive lung disease and 
bronchiectasis. Pulmonary function tests demonstrated severe obstructive lung 
disease and a negative bronchoreversibility with a moderately reduced diffusing 
capacity/alveolar volume (DLCO/VA). ABG gases revealed significant hypoxemia. 
Sputum culture was negative. Total IgE was 1140 ng/ml. Aspergillus RAST, 
precipitins and aspergillusgalactomannan antigen were positive. CF genetic 
screening tests gave negative results. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis  
(ABPA) is a hypersensitivity reaction that occurs due to bronchial aspergillus 
colonization. It is most common in patients with asthma and cystic fibrosis. We 
present a COPD case with an acute exacerbation due to Aspergillus fumigatus that 
lead to an aberrant clinical profile unresponsive to conventional treatment. 
Clinicians should consider Aspergillus fumigatus as an etiologic agent in an 
atypical and severe COPD exacerbation.

DOI: 10.4081/monaldi.2020.1155
PMID: 31986874


566. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 Jun 25. doi: 10.1164/rccm.201912-2478OC. Online 
ahead of print.

The Effect of ICS Withdrawal and Baseline Inhaled Treatment on Exacerbations in 
the IMPACT Study: A Randomized, Double-blind Multicenter Trial.

Han MK(1), Criner GJ(2), Dransfield MT(3), Halpin DMG(4), Jones CE(5), Kilbride 
S(6), Lange P(7)(8), Lettis S(6), Lipson DA(9)(10), Lomas DA(11), Martin 
N(12)(13), Wise RA(14), Singh D(15), Martinez FJ(16).

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan, 1259, Pulmonary & Critical Care, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
United States; mrking@umich.edu.
(2)Temple University Hospital, 25139, Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States.
(3)University of Alabama at Birmingham, 9968, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, 
and Critical Care Medicine, Lung Health Center, Birmingham, Alabama, United 
States.
(4)University of Exeter Medical School, 171002, College of Medicine and Health, 
Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
(5)GlaxoSmithKline Plc, 1929, Development, R&D, Collegeville, Pennsylvania, 
United States.
(6)GlaxoSmithKline Plc, 1929, Biostatistics, Stockley Park West, Uxbridge, 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
(7)University of Copenhagen, 4321, Department of Public Health, Kobenhavn, 
Denmark.
(8)Herlev-Gentofte Hospital, Respiratory Medicine, Herlev, Denmark.
(9)GlaxoSmithKline Plc, 1929, Clinical Sciences, Collegeville, Pennsylvania, 
United States.
(10)University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 14640, Pulmonary, 
Allergy and Critical Care Division, Department of Medicine, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, United States.
(11)University College London, 4919, UCL Respiratory, London, United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
(12)GlaxoSmithKline Plc, 1929, Global Medical Affairs, Brentford, United Kingdom 
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
(13)University of Leicester, 4488, Institute for Lung Health, Leicester, United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
(14)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1500, Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States.
(15)Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, 158986, Centre for Respiratory 
Medicine and Allergy, Institute of Inflammation and Repair, Manchester, United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
(16)NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, 159947, New 
York, New York, United States.

RATIONALE: In the IMPACT trial fluticasone furoate/umeclidinium/ vilanterol 
(FF/UMEC/VI) significantly reduced exacerbations compared with FF/VI or UMEC/VI 
in patients with symptomatic chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and a history 
of exacerbations.
OBJECTIVES: Understand whether inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) withdrawal affected 
IMPACT results given direct transition from prior maintenance medication to 
study medication at randomization.
METHODS: Exacerbations and change from baseline in trough forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) and St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) were 
analyzed by prior ICS use. Exacerbations were also analyzed excluding data from 
the first 30 days.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: FF/UMEC/VI significantly reduced annual 
moderate/severe exacerbation rate versus UMEC/VI in prior ICS users (29% 
reduction; p<0.001), but only a numerical reduction was seen among prior ICS 
non-users (12% reduction; p=0.115). To minimize impact from ICS withdrawal, in 
an analysis excluding the first 30 days, FF/UMEC/VI continued to significantly 
reduce annual on-treatment moderate/severe exacerbation rate (19%; p<0.001) 
versus UMEC/VI. Benefit of FF/UMEC/VI versus UMEC/VI was seen for severe 
exacerbation rates, regardless of prior ICS use (prior ICS users: 35% reduction, 
p<0.001; non-ICS users: 35% reduction, p=0.018) and overall when excluding the 
first 30 days (29%, p<0.001). Improvements from baseline with FF/UMEC/VI versus 
UMEC/VI were also maintained throughout the study for both trough FEV1 and SGRQ 
regardless of prior ICS use.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support important treatment effects from FF/UMEC/VI 
combination therapy on exacerbation reduction, lung function and quality of life 
that do not appear to be related to abrupt ICS withdrawal.
FUNDING: GSK (CTT116855/NCT02164513). Clinical trial registration available at 
www.clinicaltrials.gov, ID: NCT02164513. This article is open access and 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial 
No Derivatives License 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201912-2478OC
PMID: 32584168


567. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2019 May 9;29(1):20. doi: 10.1038/s41533-019-0123-0.

Follow-up interviews from The Salford Lung Study (COPD) and analyses per 
treatment and exacerbations.

Whalley D(1), Svedsater H(2), Doward L(1), Crawford R(1), Leather D(3), 
Lay-Flurrie J(4), Bosanquet N(5).

Author information:
(1)RTI Health Solutions, Manchester, UK.
(2)Value Evidence & Outcomes, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Brentford, Middlesex, UK. 
henrik.x.svedsater@gsk.com.
(3)Global Respiratory Franchise, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(4)Clinical Statistics, GlaxoSmithKline plc., Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(5)Imperial College London, London, UK.

The Salford Lung Study in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (SLS COPD) was a 
12-month, Phase III, open-label, randomised study comparing the effectiveness 
and safety of initiating once-daily fluticasone furoate 100 µg/vilanterol 25 µg 
(FF/VI) with continuing usual care (UC). Follow-up interviews were conducted 
among a subset of 400 patients who completed SLS COPD to further understand 
patients' experiences with treatment outcomes and the impact of COPD, and 
potential risk factors associated with higher rates of exacerbations during SLS 
COPD. Another objective was to explore how such patient-centred outcomes 
differed by randomised treatment. Patients' perceived control over COPD and 
effects on quality of life (QoL) were similar between treatment groups at the 
time of the follow-up interview, but more patients in the FF/VI group compared 
with UC reported perceived improvements in COPD control and QoL during the 
study. Of patients who experienced ≥2 exacerbations during SLS COPD, a greater 
percentage were women, were unemployed or homemakers, or were on long-term sick 
leave. Having ≥2 exacerbations also appeared to be associated with smoking, 
seeing a hospital specialist, a feeling of having no/little control over COPD, 
perceived worsening of feelings of control and reduced overall QoL since the 
start of the study, being aware of impending exacerbation occurrence and a more 
severe last exacerbation. Initiation of FF/VI was associated with a greater 
perceived improvement in patients' control of their COPD and QoL throughout SLS 
COPD than continuation of UC. Suggestions that smoking status and feelings of 
control are potentially related to exacerbation require further investigation.

DOI: 10.1038/s41533-019-0123-0
PMCID: PMC6509249
PMID: 31073124

Conflict of interest statement: D.W., L.D. and R.C. are employees of RTI Health 
Solutions, which has received funding from GlaxoSmithKline plc. H.S., D.L. and 
J.L.F. are GlaxoSmithKline plc. employees and hold GlaxoSmithKline plc. shares. 
N.B. was a chief investigator for the SLS COPD follow-up interviews and received 
a fee from GlaxoSmithKline plc.


568. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Oct;58:101831. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101831. Epub 
2019 Jul 24.

Effect of doxycyline in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - An exploratory 
study.

Singh B(1), Ghosh N(1), Saha D(2), Sarkar S(3), Bhattacharyya P(2), Chaudhury 
K(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur, West Bengal, India.
(2)Institute of Pulmocare and Research, Kolkata, India.
(3)Department of Applied Physics, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India.
(4)School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur, West Bengal, India. Electronic address: koel@smst.iitkgp.ernet.in.

PURPOSE: Various mechanisms, including oxidative stress, inflammation, and 
protease-antiprotease imbalance are proposed for the progressive decline in lung 
function in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Doxycycline, a broad 
spectrum tetracycline antibiotic, is reported to have non-antimicrobial matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMP) inhibitory action in various inflammatory conditions. 
The effect of doxycycline in COPD is hereby assessed in the present randomized 
prospective study.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The first group of COPD patients (n = 30; mild (n = 3), 
moderate (n = 6), severe (n = 7), very severe (n = 14) as per GOLD II & III 
criteria was prescribed the standard therapy, a combination of (i) short acting 
anti-muscarinic agent (SAMA) + short acting β2 agonist (SABA) inhaled and (ii) 
corticosteroid inhaled (ICS) + long acting β2 agonist (LABA) (iii) 
ICS + LABA + LAMA. Whereas doxycycline (100 mg), was used daily once or twice as 
per Body Mass Index (BMI), as an add-on to existing standard therapy for the 
second group of patients (n = 30; mild (n = 2), moderate (n = 7), severe 
(n = 8), very severe (n = 13). All recruited patients were followed-up after 3 
months of treatment. Lung function index FEV1(%) predicted, FEV1/FVC (%), 
quality of life status including COPD Assessment Test (CAT), St. George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) were assessed. Routine blood cell count also 
was performed.
RESULTS: Biochemical analysis included estimation of oxidative stress markers, 
inflammatory cytokines and proteases in plasma of both the groups. Reduction in 
oxidative stress is evidenced by a significant decrease in Lipid hydro peroxides 
(LPO), total oxidative stress (TOS) and increase in glutathione peroxidase 
(GSH-PX), reduced glutathione (GSH) and total anti-oxidant capacity (TAO) 
nitrite and nitrate (NOx) along with peroxynitrate following 3 months of add-on 
doxycycline treatment. Reduced levels of cytokines such as interleukin IL-6, 
TNF-α, IL-8 were also observed. Multivariate analysis identified TNF-α major 
effective discriminant among pre and post doxycycline treated COPD patients. The 
expression of TNF-α was inversely correlated with FEV1/FVC (%) changes. The 
levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9/tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP)-1 ratio 
(MMP-9/ TIMP-1), also decreased significantly and the decline could be 
associated with TOS. A significant increase in bilirubin and reduced glutathione 
(GSH) level was noticed in standard therapy group.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the improvement in lung function and quality 
of life in COPD patients may probably be attributed to the antioxidant, 
anti-inflammatory and anti-MMP activity of doxycycline. The potential 
therapeutic role of long-term doxycycline, in addition to its traditional 
antibiotic effect, definitely warrants further attention.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2019.101831
PMID: 31349003


569. Physiother Theory Pract. 2019 Nov 26:1-8. doi: 10.1080/09593985.2019.1694611. 
Online ahead of print.

Randomized feasibility study of twice a day functional electrostimulation in 
patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease hospitalized for 
acute exacerbation.

Lopez-Lopez L(1), Torres-Sanchez I(1), Rodriguez-Torres J(1), Cabrera-Martos 
I(1), Cahalin LP(2), Valenza MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, School of Health Sciences, University of 
Granada, Granada, Spain.
(2)Department of physiotherapy, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA.

Introduction:Pulmonary rehabilitation is an effective intervention for 
individuals who have Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). The adequate 
intensity, components, and number of sessions are difficult to determine, 
specifically in patients who have severe ventilatory limitations in order to 
produce true physiological training effects without adverse events. 
Objective:Our aim is to assess the feasibility and possible effects of a daily 
versus a twice-daily functional electrostimulation program in hospitalized 
individuals who have a severe COPD. Methods:In this randomized controlled trial, 
48 severe patients with COPD were randomized into three groups: Control Group 
(CG; n = 16), daily functional electrostimulation group (DFEG; n = 15) or 
twice-daily functional electrostimulation group (TFEG; n = 17). The main outcome 
measures were quadriceps strength, symptoms at rest and after exercise, and 
adverse events measured before and after the intervention. Results:After eight 
sessions, DFEG and TFEG showed significant differences when compared to the CG 
in all measured variables at discharge (p ≤ .001), no adverse events were 
observed in any of the treatment groups. Significant improvements were found in 
strength (p ≤ .05) between DFEG and TFEG groups. However, lower limb function 
did not present significant differences in spite of the fact that the mean 
change favored the TFEG (23.53 ± 3.53 vs. 19.56 ± 11.89). Conclusion:Further 
examination of twice per day functional electrostimulation in hospitalized 
patients with COPD with acute exacerbation appears warranted.

DOI: 10.1080/09593985.2019.1694611
PMID: 31769337


570. Ter Arkh. 2020 Apr 27;92(3):7-12. doi: 10.26442/00403660.2020.03.000239.

[Assessment of the respiratory muscles strength at patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease with various forms of comorbidity].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Kurpatov IG(1), Geltser BI(1), Kinyaikin MF(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Far Eastern Federal University.
(2)Vladivostok State Medical University.
(3)Primorskii Regional Clinical Hospital №1.

The respiratory muscles (RM) strength is the main indicator of their functional 
state. However, RM strength is not used as criteria for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) stratification.
AIM: To evaluate the RM power of COPD patients with various variants of 
comorbidity and to determine the role of comorbidity in the development of 
respiratory muscle dysfunction.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RM strength of 64 men with exacerbation of COPD was 
studied. The severity of comorbidity was assessed by the Charlson index. 
Depending on the prevalence of comorbidity, patients were divided into 3 groups: 
cardiovascular, cerebrovascular and metabolic. Maximum inspiratory (MIP) and 
expiratory (MEP) pressures in the oral cavity, maximum rate of pressure 
development (MRPD), sniff nasal inspiratory pressure (SNIP), MEP/MIP and 
SNIP/MIP indexes were determined with MicroRPM device (UK). Measured values of 
MIP, MEP and SNIP were compared with the proper ones. The most noticeable 
decrease of RM strength was defined in the group of patients with severe 
comorbidity.
RESULTS: In case of a mild comorbidity MEP and SNIP values were 68 and 78% of 
the predicted values and MIP value corresponded to the personified standard. RM 
strength of patients with COPD depended on the clinical variant of comorbidity. 
Thus, in the group of patients with cardiovascular variant of comorbidity 
auxiliary inspiratory muscles strength decreased. In the group of patients with 
cerebrovascular variant of comorbidity the expiratory muscles dysfunction 
predominated. In the group of patients with metabolic variant of comorbidity 
diaphragm dysfunction predominated.
CONCLUSION: The pathogenetic significance of various factors of COPD comorbidity 
in the development of RM dysfunction was confirmed by the results of the 
correlation analysis.

Publisher: Сила дыхательных мышц (ДМ) является основным индикатором их 
функционального состояния, однако в классификации хронической обструктивной 
болезни легких (ХОБЛ) показатели силы ДМ не рассматриваются как биомаркеры, 
характеризующие ее тяжесть, и не используются в качестве критериев для 
стратификации больных. Цель.Cравнительная оценка силы ДМ у больных ХОБЛ с 
различными вариантами коморбидности и определение роли сочетанной патологии в 
развитии респираторно-мышечной дисфункции. Материалы и методы. Исследованы 
показатели силы ДМ у 64 мужчин в возрасте 4074 лет, находившихся на стационарном 
лечении по поводу обострения ХОБЛ средней тяжести. Тяжесть коморбидной патологии 
оценивали по индексу Чарлсона. Выделены кардиоваскулярный, цереброваскулярный и 
метаболический ее варианты. На аппарате MicroRPM (CareFusion, Великобритания) 
определяли уровни максимального инспираторного (MIP), экспираторного (MEP) 
давления в ротовой полости, максимальную скорость их подъема на вдохе и выдохе, 
а также уровень интраназального (SNIP) давления. Измеренные величины MIP, MEP и 
SNIP соотносили с должными. Результаты. При тяжелой коморбидности фиксировалось 
наиболее заметное снижение силы ДМ, когда уровень ее индикаторов был в диапазоне 
4556% от должных значений. При коморбидной патологии легкой степени величина 
показателей MEP и SNIP составляла 68 и 78% от должного, а MIP соответствовал 
персонифицированному нормативу. Изменения качественных и количественных 
характеристик ДМ при ХОБЛ зависели от клинического варианта коморбидности. Так, 
ее кардиоваскулярная форма характеризовалась снижением функциональной активности 
преимущественно вспомогательных инспираторных мышц. У пациентов с ХОБЛ, 
перенесших ишемический инсульт, доминировал экспираторный тип дисфункции. Среди 
больных ХОБЛ с метаболическим синдромом гипофункция инспираторных ДМ 
ассоциировалась прежде всего с угнетением сократительной способности диафрагмы. 
Заключение.Патогенетическое значение различных факторов коморбидности ХОБЛ в 
развитии дисфункции ДМ подтверждалось результатами корреляционного анализа. Учет 
этих факторов и дифференцированный подход к оценке функционального статуса ДМ 
способствуют ранней диагностике и персонифицированной терапии их дисфункции.

DOI: 10.26442/00403660.2020.03.000239
PMID: 32598786


571. ERJ Open Res. 2020 Apr 27;6(2):00187-2019. doi: 10.1183/23120541.00187-2019. 
eCollection 2020 Apr.

Efficacy and safety of two doses of budesonide/formoterol fumarate metered dose 
inhaler in COPD.

Hanania NA(1), Papi A(2), Anzueto A(3), Martinez FJ(4), Rossman KA(5), 
Cappelletti CS(6), Duncan EA(6), Nyberg JS(7), Dorinsky PM(6).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Research Centre on Asthma and COPD, Dept of Medical Sciences, University of 
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Pulmonary Medicine and Critical Care, University of Texas Health Science 
Center and South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(4)Joan and Sanford I. Weill Dept of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA.
(5)AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(6)AstraZeneca, Durham, NC, USA.
(7)Former employee of AstraZeneca, Morristown, NJ, USA.

Inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist combination therapy is a 
recommended treatment option for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) and increased exacerbation risk, particularly those with elevated 
blood eosinophil levels. SOPHOS (NCT02727660) evaluated the efficacy and safety 
of two doses of budesonide/formoterol fumarate dihydrate metered dose inhaler 
(BFF MDI) versus formoterol fumarate dihydrate (FF) MDI, each delivered using 
co-suspension delivery technology, in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD 
and a history of exacerbations. In this phase 3, randomised, double-blind, 
parallel-group, 12-52-week, variable length study, patients received twice-daily 
BFF MDI 320/10 µg or 160/10 µg, or FF MDI 10 µg. The primary endpoint was change 
from baseline in morning pre-dose trough forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 
at week 12. Secondary and other endpoints included assessments of 
moderate/severe COPD exacerbations and safety. The primary analysis (modified 
intent-to-treat) population included 1843 patients (BFF MDI 320/10 µg, n=619; 
BFF MDI 160/10 µg, n=617; and FF MDI, n=607). BFF MDI 320/10 µg and 160/10 µg 
improved morning pre-dose trough FEV1 at week 12 versus FF MDI (least squares 
mean differences 34 mL [p=0.0081] and 32 mL [p=0.0134], respectively), increased 
time to first exacerbation (hazard ratios 0.827 [p=0.0441] and 0.803 [p=0.0198], 
respectively) and reduced exacerbation rate (rate ratios 0.67 [p=0.0001] and 
0.71 [p=0.0010], respectively). Lung function and exacerbation benefits were 
driven by patients with blood eosinophil counts ≥150 cells·mm-3. The incidence 
of adverse events was similar, and pneumonia rates were low (≤2.4%) across 
treatments. SOPHOS demonstrated the efficacy and tolerability of BFF MDI 
320/10 µg and 160/10 µg in patients with moderate-to-very severe COPD at 
increased risk of exacerbations.

Copyright ©ERS 2020.

DOI: 10.1183/23120541.00187-2019
PMCID: PMC7184113
PMID: 32363206

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: N.A. Hanania has received 
personal fees for serving on advisory boards or as a consultant for AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, Novartis, Sanofi Genzyme and 
Sunovion; his institution has received research grant support on his behalf from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim and GlaxoSmithKline. Conflict of interest: A. 
Papi reports board membership, consultancy, payment for lectures, grants for 
research and travel expenses reimbursement from AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Mundipharma and TEVA; payment for lectures 
and travel expenses reimbursement from Menarini, Novartis and Zambon; board 
membership, payment for lectures, grants for research and travel expenses 
reimbursement from Pfizer; and grants from Sanofi, outside the submitted work. 
Conflict of interest: A. Anzueto reports personal fees for consultancy from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and Sunovion 
Pharmaceutical; and a research grant to University of Texas Health, San Antonio, 
from GlaxoSmithKline, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: F.J. 
Martinez reports personal fees, nonfinancial support and other from Boehringer 
Ingelheim during the conduct of the study; personal fees and nonfinancial 
support from the American College of Chest Physicians, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Canadian Respiratory Network, Chiesi, ConCert, Continuing Education, 
Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Inova Fairfax Health System, Miller Communications, 
the National Association for Continuing Education, Novartis, Pearl 
Pharmaceuticals, PeerView Communications, Physicians Education Resource, 
Potomac, Prime Communications, the Puerto Rican Respiratory Society, Roche, 
Rockpointe, Sunovion, Teva, Theravance, Unity, University of Alabama Birmingham, 
UpToDate, WebMD/Medscape and the Western Connecticut Health Network; 
nonfinancial support from Gilead, Nitto, ProterixBio and Zambon; personal fees 
from Academic CME, the American Thoracic Society, Columbia University, 
Integritas, MD Magazine, Methodist Hospital Brooklyn, New York University, 
Patara, PlatformIQ; other from Afferent/Merck, Bayer, Biogen, Bridge 
Biotherapeutics, Prometic and Veracyte; grants from the NIH, Promedior and Rare 
Disease Healthcare Communications. Conflict of interest: K.A. Rossman is a 
full-time employee of AstraZeneca. Conflict of interest: C.S. Cappelletti is a 
full-time employee of AstraZeneca. Conflict of interest: E.A. Duncan is a 
full-time employee of AstraZeneca. Conflict of interest: J.S. Nyberg is a former 
employee of AstraZeneca. Conflict of interest: P.M. Dorinsky is a full-time 
employee of AstraZeneca.


572. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Compensatory Measure.

Pahal P, Hashmi MF(1), Sharma S(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 
Jan–.
2020 May 23.

Author information:
(1)College of Physicians and Surgeons
(2)Mery Fitzgerald Hospital

By 2020, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is expected to be the 
third leading cause of death according to the epidemiological data. Although the 
prognosis of these patients is improving with new treatment modalities, the 
mortality in these patients is still high. Tobacco smoking accounts for most 
cases of COPD in developed nations. The severity of the disease depends on the 
number of pack-years smoked and duration of smoking. This leads to progressive 
loss of lung function due to damage of air sacs. However, in developing 
countries, environmental pollutants are the major cause of COPD. A significant 
population derives its domestic energy from biomass fuel. This increases the 
burden of respiratory diseases globally. Dung cakes, residues from 
the agricultural crop, firewood are the commonly used biomass fuel. There are 
toxic fumes into the air in the form of particulate matter due to the burning of 
biomass fuel and consist of carbon monoxide, polyaromatic and polyorganic 
hydrocarbons, and formaldehyde. Many COPD patients develop acute exacerbation 
and are admitted to intensive care units (ICU). Many factors affect the outcome, 
and one of the most important factors is the acid-base disorder occurring in 
COPD patients.

Copyright © 2020, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30247837


573. BMC Pulm Med. 2020 Jan 13;20(1):11. doi: 10.1186/s12890-019-1000-x.

REALizing and improving management of stable COPD in China: a multi-center, 
prospective, observational study to realize the current situation of COPD 
patients in China (REAL) - rationale, study design, and protocol.

Yang T(1), Cai B(2), Cao B(1), Kang J(3), Wen F(4), Yao W(5), Zheng J(6), Ling 
X(7), Shang H(7), Wang C(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, National Clinical 
Research Center for Respiratory Diseases, Institute of Respiratory Medicine, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, No 2, East 
Yinghua Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100029, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory 
Disease, 1st Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou, China.
(7)Department of Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca China, Shanghai, China.
(8)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, National Clinical 
Research Center for Respiratory Diseases, Institute of Respiratory Medicine, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, No 2, East 
Yinghua Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100029, China. wangchen66366@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the fifth leading 
cause of death in China with a reported prevalence of 8.2% people aged 
≥40 years. It is recommended that Chinese physicians follow Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) and national guidelines, yet many 
patients with COPD in China remain undiagnosed. Furthermore, missed diagnoses 
and a lack of standardized diagnosis and treatment remain significant problems. 
The situation is further complicated by a lack of large-scale, long-term, 
prospective studies of real-world outcomes, including exacerbation rates, 
disease severity, efficacy of treatment, and compliance of COPD patients in 
China.
METHODS/DESIGN: The REALizing and improving management of stable COPD in China 
(REAL) study is a 52-week multi-center, prospective, observational trial. REAL 
aims to recruit approximately 5000 outpatients aged ≥40 years with a clinical 
diagnosis of COPD per GOLD 2016. Outpatients will be consecutively recruited 
from approximately 50 tertiary and secondary hospitals randomly selected across 
six geographic regions to provide a representative population. Patients will 
receive conventional medical care as determined by their treating physicians. 
The primary objective is to evaluate COPD patient outcomes including lung 
function, health status, exacerbations, hospitalization rate, and dyspnea 
following 1 year of current clinical practice. Secondary objectives are to 
assess disease severity, treatment patterns, adherence to medication, and 
associated risk factors. Data will be collected at two study visits, at 
patients' usual care visits, and by telephone interview every 3 months.
DISCUSSION: Knowledge of COPD among physicians in China is poor. The REAL study 
will provide reliable information on COPD management, outcomes, and risk factors 
that may help improve the standard of care in China. Patient recruitment began 
on 30 June 2017 and the estimated primary completion date is 30 July 2019.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03131362. Registered on 20 
March 2017.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-019-1000-x
PMCID: PMC6958695
PMID: 31931767

Conflict of interest statement: TY, BCai, BCao, JK, FW, WY, JZ, and CW declare 
that they have no competing interests. HS is an employee of AstraZeneca China. 
XL is a previous employee of AstraZeneca China. AstraZeneca China will be 
involved in interpretation of the results.


574. Enferm Clin. 2019 Sep;29 Suppl 2:159-165. doi: 10.1016/j.enfcli.2019.04.024. 
Epub 2019 Jul 29.

Relationship between severity and quality of life in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease patients at hospitals' outpatient units in Jakarta.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Nurwidhiyasari D(1), Rachmi SF(2), Indracahyani A(3), Nuraini T(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Nursing Universitas Indonesia, Depok, West Java, Indonesia; 
Persahabatan Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(2)Faculty of Nursing Universitas Indonesia, Depok, West Java, Indonesia. 
Electronic address: shanti.rachmi@ui.ac.id.
(3)Faculty of Nursing Universitas Indonesia, Depok, West Java, Indonesia.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the quality of life associated 
with the health of patients with COPD.
METHOD: The design of this study used a cross-sectional with convenience 
sampling method in 200 stable COPD patients, who had suffered COPD for more than 
3 months but who did not have stage 3 or stage 4 chronic heart failure, at three 
Hospital in DKI Jakarta. Groups A to D were divided based on the COPD Assessment 
Test (CAT), the exacerbation category using the recommendation from GOLD, and 
the quality of life questionnaire using the St. George's Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ).
RESULTS: The chi-square analysis showed that p=0.000 (p<0.05), indicating that 
there was a difference of proportion between Group A, Group B, Group C, and 
Group D, which means that there is relationship between the ABCD Groupings 
classification on the quality of life.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that there is a relationship between severity 
using ABCD Groupings Classification and the quality of life for COPD patients.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.enfcli.2019.04.024
PMID: 31371256


575. Heart Lung. 2020 May-Jun;49(3):331-335. doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2020.01.008. Epub 
2020 Feb 12.

Morphological overview of cardiovascular comorbidities in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: Frank's sign.

Ogan N(1), Gunay E(2), Ekici B(3), Baha A(4), Gulensoy ES(5), Akpinar EE(5), 
Yuksel A(5).

Author information:
(1)Ufuk University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Chest Diseases, Ankara, 
Turkey. Electronic address: nalanogan@gmail.com.
(2)Afyon Kocatepe Faculty of Medicine, Department of Chest Diseases, 
Afyonkarahisar, Turkey.
(3)Ufuk University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(4)Kyrenia Akcicek National Hospital, Department of Chest Diseases, Kyrenia, 
Cyprus.
(5)Ufuk University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Chest Diseases, Ankara, 
Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Cardiovascular diseases are the most common and important 
comorbidities in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Literature indicates that there may be a relationship between diagonal earlobe 
crease (DELC) and coronary artery disease (CAD). Accordingly, the present study 
aimed to assess the relationship with DELC and cardiac comorbidities in patients 
with COPD during routine physical examination.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this prospective cohort study, we evaluated the 
demographic data, pulmonary function test (PFT) results, lipid profile, oxygen 
saturation, and the presence of DELC in patients with COPD and control subjects.
RESULTS: DELC was diagnosed in 155 (62%) of COPD patients and these patients had 
a higher prevalence of CAD (p = 0.044). Moreover, DELC was diagnosed in 135 men 
(68.5%) and 20 (37.7%) women in the COPD group (p<0.001) and in 39 (48.8%) men 
and 14 (56.0%) women in the control group (p = 0.527). On the other hand, CAD 
was diagnosed in 18% of patients with early-stage COPD (n = 104) and in 30.8% of 
patients with late-stage COPD (n = 146) (p = 0.041). The sensitivity and 
specificity of DELC positivity in predicting CAD were 80.65% and 44.15% in COPD 
patients, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The presence of cardiac comorbidities in COPD patients may play a 
vital role in the severity of the disease, exacerbations, and may also reduce 
the treatment response. Accordingly, an earlobe examination of patients with 
COPD may be useful in predicting the presence of cardiac comorbidities with high 
sensitivity.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2020.01.008
PMID: 32061412


576. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Aug 7;14:1779-1787. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S162781. eCollection 2019.

Mepolizumab in the treatment of eosinophilic chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Mkorombindo T(1), Dransfield MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Lung Health Center, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care 
Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, USA.

Despite maximal medical therapy, a subset of patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease continue to suffer acute exacerbations. It is also clear that 
a subset of this population has elevated blood eosinophils. In addition to 
clearly responding better to inhaled corticosteroids, it is also possible that 
this subgroup may benefit from biologic treatments targeting eosinophilic 
inflammation. Mepolizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against interleukin-5 
(IL-5), may have a therapeutic effect in a subgroup of patients with COPD and 
eosinophilic airway inflammation. In this review, we discuss the biologic 
rationale for mepolizumab targeting IL-5 in eosinophilic COPD as well as the 
results of recently published clinical trials.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S162781
PMCID: PMC6689550
PMID: 31496677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Mark T Dransfield reports grants from the 
American Lung Association, NIH, Department of Defense and Department of Veterans 
Affairs; consulting fees from AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Mereo, Pulmonx, 
PneumRx/BTG, and Quark; contracted clinical trial support from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, GALA, GlaxoSmithKline, Nuvaira, 
Pulmonx, and PneumRx/BTG. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


577. Clin Respir J. 2020 May 4. doi: 10.1111/crj.13200. Online ahead of print.

Prevalence of non-thyroidal illness syndrome in COPD exacerbation and effect of 
hypoxaemia and hypercapnia on thyroid functions.

Gumus A(1), Ozyurt S(1), Ozcelik N(1), Kara BY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, Rize, 
Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic 
inflammatory disease showing acute exacerbations during its course. 
Comorbidities often accompany. Non-thyroidal illness syndrome (NTIS) occurs 
because of the functional impairment in the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis 
in severe critical cases. The objective of the current study is to determine the 
prevalence of NTIS among hospitalised patients due to acute exacerbation of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) and to reveal the factors 
affecting thyroid functions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 132 patients hospitalised for AECOPD were 
enroled. Arterial blood gas samples at room air and venous blood samples for 
thyroid function tests were obtained within 24 hours following hospitalisation.
RESULTS: The mean age was 69.3 ± 9.6 years with male predominance (M/F:130/2). 
The prevalence of NTIS was 55%. Subgroups of NTIS cases were analysed. Low TSH 
levels were the most common pathology (55%). Patients with NTIS had 
significantly lower PaO2 and SaO2 levels compared with those without NTIS 
(P = 0.045 and P = 0.022, respectively). In addition, a positive correlation was 
found between PaO2 and free thyroxine (fT4) (P < 0.001, r = 0.313). A 
statistically significant negative correlation between PaCO2 and fT4 was found 
(P < 0.001, r = -0.393). And a statistically significant negative correlation 
between PaCO2 and free triiodothyronine (fT3) values were found (P = 0.040, 
r = -0.183).
CONCLUSION: NTIS is a very common condition during AECOPD. We believe that 
hypoxemia causing functional impairment in the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid 
axis is the main mechanism in NTIS development and hypercapnia disrupts freeT3 
and freeT4 production and secretion.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13200
PMID: 32367619


578. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Dec 5;14:2815-2823. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S228465. eCollection 2019.

Physical Activity in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease on 
Long-Term Oxygen Therapy: A Cross-Sectional Study.

Paneroni M(1), Ambrosino N(2), Simonelli C(1), Bertacchini L(1), Venturelli 
M(3), Vitacca M(1).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Rehabilitation Division, ICS Maugeri SPA SB, Institute of 
Lumezzane, IRCCS, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Respiratory Rehabilitation Division, ICS Maugeri SPA SB, Institute of 
Montescano, IRCCS, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: There are few studies evaluating physical activity (PA) in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) on long-term oxygen 
therapy (LTOT).
AIM: To assess PA in hypoxemic COPD patients on LTOT.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, we compared lung function, arterial 
blood gases, respiratory and peripheral muscle strength, 6-min walking distance 
(6MWD), daily energy expenditure and steps, and health-related quality of life 
(HRQL) in COPD patients on LTOT (LTOT group) versus two groups of control 
patients not needing LTOT: with (HYPOX) and without (COPD) exercise-induced 
desaturations.
RESULTS: Groups did not differ as regards demographics, anthropometrics, 
peripheral or respiratory muscle strength. Compared to the other groups, LTOT 
patients had more severe airway obstruction and lung hyperinflation, greater 
number and severity of comorbidities, shorter 6MWD, as well as lower mean SpO2 
during 6MWD and worse quality of life. LTOT patients had a lower daily energy 
expenditure, shorter time spent > 3.0 METs and longer sedentary time compared to 
the COPD group, and less daily steps compared to the other groups. No 
significant difference in any parameter of PA was found between COPD and HYPOX. 
In LTOT patients, daily steps showed a strong correlation with 6MWD, and a 
moderate correlation with airway obstruction, level of oxygenation, 
comorbidities and quality of life but not with peripheral and respiratory muscle 
strength. In COPD and HYPOX patients, daily steps were strongly correlated with 
6MWD and level of oxygenation as assessed by PaO2/FiO2. There was no significant 
correlation between mean SpO2 and 6MWD in any group.
CONCLUSION: COPD patients on LTOT perform less physical activity than patients 
not needing LTOT, both with and without exercise-induced desaturations. Patients 
with exercise-induced desaturations do not perform less physical activity than 
those without.

© 2019 Paneroni et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S228465
PMCID: PMC6901041
PMID: 31824146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


579. J Asthma. 2019 Nov 12:1-16. doi: 10.1080/02770903.2019.1687716. Online ahead of 
print.

Comparative safety and effectiveness of inhaled bronchodilators and 
corticosteroids for treating asthma-COPD overlap: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Amegadzie JE(1), Gorgui J(2)(3), Acheampong L(1), Gamble JM(4), Farrell J(1), 
Gao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, 
Newfoundland, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Research Center, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Science, School of Pharmacy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, 
Ontario, Canada.

Objective: To determine the safety and effectiveness of current 
pharmacotherapies consisting of long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA) and/or inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with asthma-COPD overlap.Data sources: A 
systematic search was conducted using the PubMed, EMBASE, and Web of Science 
databases up to June 2018.Study selections: Only studies comparing the safety 
and effectiveness of LABA and/or ICS in patients with asthma-COPD overlap were 
included. A meta-analysis was performed to calculate risk ratio (RR) and 95% 
confidence interval (CI) using Inverse Variance Random-effects model.Results: 
From a total of 3382 articles retrieved, three randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs), six cohort studies (CS), one nested case control study fulfilled the 
inclusion criteria for three independent meta-analyses representing 181,603 
participants. Three CS results show LABA was associated with decreased risk of 
myocardial infarction (combined RR: 0.80, 95% CI 0.74-0.87) versus non-LABA use; 
ICS/LABA was associated with a lower risk of death or hospitalization (combined 
RR: 0.82, 95% CI 0.75-0.90) compared to no use. Results from RCTs, no clear 
difference in lung function decline in FEV1 was found (combined mean difference: 
0.08, 95% CI 0.15-0.32) in patients receiving ICS and/or LABA compared to 
placebo. However, due to lack of data, exacerbations, fractures and 
nontuberculous mycobacterial pulmonary disease outcomes were not 
meta-analyzed.Conclusions: Among patients with asthma-COPD overlap, LABA is 
associated with decreased risk of myocardial infarction; and the combination 
therapy of ICS/LABA appears to reduce the risk of death or hospitalization. More 
studies of quality data and larger number of patients are needed.REGISTRATION: 
PROSPERO (CRD42018090863).

DOI: 10.1080/02770903.2019.1687716
PMID: 31668101


580. JMIR Med Inform. 2019 Oct 21;7(4):e13085. doi: 10.2196/13085.

Fast Prediction of Deterioration and Death Risk in Patients With Acute 
Exacerbation of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Using Vital Signs and 
Admission History: Retrospective Cohort Study.

Zhou M(#)(1), Chen C(#)(2), Peng J(2), Luo CH(2), Feng DY(3), Yang H(3), Xie 
X(2), Zhou Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Surgical Intensive Care Unit, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The Third Affiliated 
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has 2 courses with 
different options for medical treatment: the acute exacerbation phase and the 
stable phase. Stable patients can use the Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) to guide treatment strategies. However, GOLD 
could not classify and guide the treatment of acute exacerbation as acute 
exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD) is a complex process.
OBJECTIVE: This paper aimed to propose a fast severity assessment and risk 
prediction approach in order to strengthen monitoring and medical interventions 
in advance.
METHODS: The proposed method uses a classification and regression tree (CART) 
and had been validated using the AECOPD inpatient's medical history and first 
measured vital signs at admission that can be collected within minutes. We 
identified 552 inpatients with AECOPD from February 2011 to June 2018 
retrospectively and used the classifier to predict the outcome and prognosis of 
this hospitalization.
RESULTS: The overall accuracy of the proposed CART classifier was 76.2% (83/109 
participants) with 95% CI 0.67-0.84. The precision, recall, and F-measure for 
the mild AECOPD were 76% (50/65 participants), 82% (50/61 participants), and 
0.79, respectively, and those with severe AECOPD were 75% (33/44 participants), 
68% (33/48 participants), and 0.72, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This fast prediction CART classifier for early exacerbation 
detection could trigger the initiation of timely treatment, thereby potentially 
reducing exacerbation severity and recovery time and improving the patients' 
health.

©Mi Zhou, Chuan Chen, Junfeng Peng, Ching-Hsing Luo, Ding Yun Feng, Hailing 
Yang, Xiaohua Xie, Yuqi Zhou. Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics 
(http://medinform.jmir.org), 21.10.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/13085
PMCID: PMC6913742
PMID: 31638595

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


581. Lung India. 2019 Sep-Oct;36(5):422-433. doi: 10.4103/lungindia.lungindia_39_19.

Pidotimod: In-depth review of current evidence.

Mahashur A(1), Thomas PK(2), Mehta P(3), Nivangune K(4), Muchhala S(4), Jain 
R(4).

Author information:
(1)PD Hinduja National Hospital and Medical Research Centre, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Apollo Clinic, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 
India.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Mehta Hospital, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, 
India.
(4)Department of Medical Affairs, Wockhardt Limited, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Pidotimod, an immunostimulant, is researched for over two decades. Current 
evidence indicates its utility in a variety of indications in children as well 
as in adults. Its immunostimulant activity has been firmly established in the 
management of recurrent respiratory infections in children with or without 
asthma. Compared to standard of care alone, addition of pidotimod to standard of 
care significantly prevents the recurrences and reduces the severity and 
duration of acute episodes, ultimately resulting in reduced visits to pediatric 
clinics and lower absenteeism at school. In adults, pidotimod is effective in 
the prevention and treatment of acute infectious exacerbations of chronic 
bronchitis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Further, it has 
been evaluated in indications such as pneumonia, hand-food-mouth disease, 
bronchiectasis, and chronic idiopathic urticaria. From a total of 32 studies 
conducted in child (24 studies) and adult (8 studies) population, this in-depth 
review discusses the current evidence of pidotimod. With further exploration, 
the immunostimulant activity of pidotimod might be extended to different 
immunological disorders.

DOI: 10.4103/lungindia.lungindia_39_19
PMCID: PMC6710962
PMID: 31464215

Conflict of interest statement: None


582. Salmeterol.

Adams BS(1), Nguyen H(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 
Jan–.
2020 May 11.

Author information:
(1)Nova Southeastern University
(2)NOVA Southeastern University

Salmeterol is a highly selective, long-acting beta-2 adrenergic agonist 
indicated in the treatment of asthma, maintenance of airflow obstruction in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and prevention of exercise-induced 
bronchospasm (EIB). Salmeterol is used in combination with inhaled 
corticosteroids in the treatment of asthma. It can be useful in both the 
maintenance of asthma and the prevention of asthma attacks. It is usually 
prescribed for severe persistent asthma not properly controlled with the 
combination of a short-acting beta-adrenergic agonist and a corticosteroid. 
Salmeterol is not indicated in patients with mild asthma who are well maintained 
on short-acting beta-agonists. Salmeterol monotherapy is a contraindication for 
treating asthma patients due to the increased risk of mortality. Salmeterol 
administration with concomitant inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) has significantly 
reduced asthma mortality. Salmeterol can, however, be used as a monotherapy in 
the treatment of COPD, particularly as a maintenance treatment. Salmeterol has 
shown to increase FEV1 and the FEV1/FVC ratio in both asthma and COPD patients.

Copyright © 2020, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32491385


583. Sleep Breath. 2020 Feb 26. doi: 10.1007/s11325-020-02039-8. Online ahead of 
print.

Subjective sleep quality is associated with disease status in COPD patients. The 
cross-sectional Greek UNLOCK study.

Ierodiakonou D(1)(2), Bouloukaki I(3)(4), Kampouraki M(5), Papadokostakis P(6), 
Poulorinakis I(7), Lampraki I(2), Athanasiou P(2), Schiza S(8), Tsiligianni 
I(9); Greek UNLOCK Group.

Collaborators: Kampouraki M, Ierodiakonou D, Tsiligianni I, Lintovoi E, 
Karanassos D, Papadokostakis P, Poulorinakis I, Maltezis K, Chorti M, 
Petrovitsos E, Hamind S, Gialamas I, Athanasiou P, Bempi V, Lampraki I.

Author information:
(1)Health Planning Unit, Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Crete, Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(2)Department of Public Health, Heraklion University Hospital, Heraklion, Crete, 
Greece.
(3)Health Planning Unit, Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Crete, Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. 
izolthi@gmail.com.
(4)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Respiratory Medicine, School of 
Medicine, University of Crete, Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, 
Greece. izolthi@gmail.com.
(5)Primary care practice, Health Center of Moires, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(6)Garipa primary care practice, Health Center of Arcalohori, Heraklion, Crete, 
Greece.
(7)Primary care practice, Health Center of Agia Varvara, Heraklion, Crete, 
Greece.
(8)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Respiratory Medicine, School of 
Medicine, University of Crete, Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, 
Greece.
(9)Health Planning Unit, Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Crete, Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. 
i.tsiligianni@uoc.gr.

PURPOSE: The association of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
severity and related health status with sleep quality remains unclear. We aimed 
to investigate the association between COPD and sleep quality in the Greek 
national branch of the UNLOCK cohort.
METHODS: A sample of 257 COPD patients enrolled cross-sectionally from primary 
care in Greece. Sleep quality was assessed by the COPD and Asthma Sleep Impact 
Scale (CASIS-7 items) questionnaire (higher score indicates worse sleep 
quality). We tested for associations of sleep impairment with health status (CAT 
and mMRC scores), exacerbations, hospitalizations, GOLD 2018 ABCD status, 
inhaler adherence, frailty, and sense of coherence, adjusting for age, gender, 
smoking status, and comorbidities.
RESULTS: The majority of patients reported uncontrolled symptoms (91% with ≥ 10 
CAT or 61% with ≥ 2 mMRC). Mean (SD) age was 65 (12.3) with 79% males. CASIS-7 
mean (SD) score was 37.7 (12.9). After adjustments, CASIS was significantly 
associated with worse health status (e.g., CASIS increased with CAT ≥ 10 
[β = 12.53, (95% CI, 6.82, 18.25); p < 0.001], mMRC ≥ 2 [β = 4.96, (95% CI, 
1.56, 8.34); p = 0.004]), COPD severity (CAT-based GOLD BD [β = 8.88 (95% CI, 
2.50, 15.26); p = 0.007]), frailty [β = 8.85 (95% CI 4.45,13.25); p < 0.001], 
and sense of coherence [β = -0.14 (95% CI -0.21, -0.06), p < 001]. When using a 
CASIS cut-off score of 30 as indicator of sleep impairment, additional to the 
aforementioned associations, we found increased risk for sleep impairment with 
≥ 2 exacerbations/year and poor inhaler adherence (p value < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that worse health status and COPD severity are 
associated with poor sleep quality in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s11325-020-02039-8
PMID: 32103395


584. Eur Respir J. 2019 May 23;53(5):1802014. doi: 10.1183/13993003.02014-2018. Print 
2019 May.

CRP-guided antibiotic treatment in acute exacerbations of COPD in hospital 
admissions.

Prins HJ(1), Duijkers R(1), van der Valk P(2), Schoorl M(3), Daniels JMA(4), van 
der Werf TS(5), Boersma WG(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept Pulmonary Diseases, Northwest Hospital, Alkmaar, The Netherlands.
(2)Dept of Pulmonary Diseases, Medic Spectrum Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
(3)Dept of Clinical Chemistry, Haematology and Immunology, Northwest Hospital, 
Alkmaar, The Netherlands.
(4)Dept of Pulmonary Diseases, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)University of Groningen, Dept of Pulmonary Diseases and Tuberculosis, 
University Medical Center, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2019 May 23;53(5):
    Eur Respir J. 2019 Oct 17;54(4):
    Eur Respir J. 2019 Oct 17;54(4):

The role of antibiotics in acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) is controversial and a biomarker identifying patients who benefit 
from antibiotics is mandatory. We performed a randomised, controlled trial in 
patients with acute exacerbations of COPD, comparing C-reactive protein 
(CRP)-guided antibiotic treatment to patient reported symptoms in accordance 
with the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) strategy, 
in order to show a reduction in antibiotic prescription.Patients hospitalised 
with acute exacerbations of COPD were randomised to receive antibiotics based 
either on the GOLD strategy or according to the CRP strategy (CRP ≥50 mg·L-1).In 
total, 101 patients were randomised to the CRP group and 119 to the GOLD group. 
Fewer patients in the CRP group were treated with antibiotics compared to the 
GOLD group (31.7% versus 46.2%, p=0.028; adjusted odds ratio (OR) 0.178, 95% CI 
0.077-0.411, p=0.029). The 30-day treatment failure rate was nearly equal (44.5% 
in the CRP group versus 45.5% in the GOLD-group, p=0.881; adjusted OR 1.146, 95% 
CI 0.649-1.187, p=0.630), as was the time to next exacerbation (32 days in the 
CRP group versus 28 days in the GOLD group, p=0.713; adjusted hazard ratio 
0.878, 95% CI 0.649-1.187, p=0.398). Length of stay was similar in both groups 
(7 days in the CRP group versus 6 days in the GOLD group, p=0.206). On day-30, 
no difference in symptom score, quality of life or serious adverse events was 
detected.Use of CRP as a biomarker to guide antibiotic treatment in severe acute 
exacerbations of COPD leads to a significant reduction in antibiotic treatment. 
In the present study, no differences in adverse events between both groups were 
found. Further research is needed for the generalisability of these findings.

Copyright ©ERS 2019.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.02014-2018
PMID: 30880285

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: H.J. Prins has nothing to 
disclose. Conflict of interest: R. Duijkers has nothing to disclose. Conflict of 
interest: P. van der Valk has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: 
M. Schoorl has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: J.M.A. Daniels has 
nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: T.S. van der Werf has nothing to 
disclose. Conflict of interest: W.G. Boersma reports grants from GSK and Foreest 
Medical School, during the conduct of the study.


585. J Investig Med. 2020 Apr;68(4):846-855. doi: 10.1136/jim-2019-001207. Epub 2019 
Dec 31.

Enhanced risk of traumatic brain injury in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Huang TH(1)(2), Chen CZ(1), Kuo HI(1), Er HP(1), Lin SH(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Chest Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng 
Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan shlin922@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
(4)Department of Public Health, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(5)Biostatistics Consulting Center, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, 
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

This study tests our hypothesis that patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) have an increased risk of traumatic brain injury (TBI).In this 
nationwide retrospective cohort study, we used a subset of Taiwan's National 
Health Insurance Research Database, involving 1 million randomly selected 
beneficiaries. Patients with newly diagnosed COPD between 2000 and 2008 were 
identified. They were subgrouped as 'COPDAE+' (if they had severe acute 
exacerbation of COPD during the follow-ups) or 'COPDAE-' (if they had no acute 
exacerbation), and were frequency matched with randomly selected subjects 
without COPD (the 'non-COPD' group). Baseline differences were balanced by the 
inverse probability of treatment weighting based on the propensity score. For 
each patient, the risk of TBI during the subsequent 5 years was determined. The 
competing risk of death was controlled.We identified 3734 patients in 'COPDAE+', 
and frequency matched them with 11,202 patients in 'COPDAE-' and 11,202 subjects 
in 'non-COPD'. Compared with those in 'non-COPD', patients in 'COPDAE+' and 
'COPDAE-' had an increased risk of TBI: the adjusted HR for 'COPDAE+' was 1.50, 
95% CI 1.31 to 1.73, and that for 'COPDAE-' was 1.21, 95% CI 1.09 to 1.34. The 
highest risk was observed in the 'COPDAE+' group that aged <65 (the adjusted HR 
was 1.92; 95% CI 1.39 to 2.64).COPD has been linked to complications beyond the 
respiratory system. In this study we showed that COPD is associated with an 
increased risk of TBI.

© American Federation for Medical Research 2020. Re-use permitted under CC 
BY-NC. No commercial re-use. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jim-2019-001207
PMCID: PMC7231432
PMID: 31892639

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


586. J Health Pollut. 2019 Nov 27;9(24):191209. doi: 10.5696/2156-9614-9.24.191209. 
eCollection 2019 Dec.

Eosinophilic Airway Inflammation in Patients with Stable Biomass Smoke- versus 
Tobacco Smoke-Associated Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Fernandes L(1), Rane S(1), Mandrekar S(2), Mesquita AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Goa Medical College, Goa, India.
(2)Department of Pathology, Goa Medical College, Goa, India.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an inflammatory 
disease with predominant involvement of neutrophils, macrophages and CD8+ 
lymphocytes. Eosinophilic airway inflammations are reported in stable state and 
during acute exacerbations of tobacco smoke-associated COPD (TS-COPD). Women 
exposed to biomass fuel smoke are known to have eosinophils in sputum. However, 
little is known about the sputum cellular inflammatory profile in biomass fuel 
smoke-associated COPD (BMS-COPD). We therefore aimed to compare the sputum 
cellular inflammatory profile in tobacco smoke- and biomass smoke-associated 
COPD.
METHODS: The study was conducted in a tertiary care hospital in Goa, India. A 
total of 113 patients with stable COPD reporting to the outpatient pulmonary 
clinic were recruited. All participants were ≥ 40 years of age. Sputum induction 
studies were performed by the method of Pizzichini et al. after baseline subject 
characterization. Significant eosinophilia was defined as induced sputum 
eosinophils ≥ 3%.
RESULTS: There were 85 TS-COPD and 28 BMS-COPD patients. The mean age [standard 
deviation (SD)] was 64.7 (7.8) and 63.0 years (8.3), p = 0.32 in TS and 
BMS-COPD, respectively. Eighteen subjects (21.1%) were female smokers. The 
smoking pack-year median [interquartile range (IQR)] was 36 (20, 58) and 
hour-years of biomass smoke exposure mean (SD) was 192.4 (61). The TS-COPD and 
BMS-COPD cases showed a post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one 
second (FEV1%) mean (SD) of 57.9 (17.1), and 62.6 (19.4), p= 0.22, respectively. 
Both groups had similar symptoms and severity of disease. Induced sputum total 
cell count per gram of sputum × 106 mean (SD) was 3.05 (1.53) for TS-COPD, and 
2.55(1.37) for BMS-COPD p=0.12. The neutrophils % mean (SD) was 86.4 (16.5) and 
87.9 (10.2), p = 0.64; eosinophils % median (IQR) was 2.5 (1, 10) and 8 (2, 
12.8), p = 0.07; lymphocytes % median (IQR) was 0 (0, 0.75) and 0 (0, 1) p = 
0.13; macrophages % median (IQR) was 2.5 (0.75, 5.7) and 1 (0, 4.7) p = 0.13; 
and significant eosinophilia (eosinophils ≥3%) was 42 (49.4%) and 20 (71%), 
p=0.04, for TS-COPD and BMS-COPD, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: For similar severity of disease and clinical symptoms, significant 
eosinophilic inflammation was observed in stable BMS-COPD, while both groups had 
similar neutrophilic inflammation.
PARTICIPANT CONSENT: Obtained.
ETHICS APPROVAL: The study was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of 
the Goa Medical College, Goa, India.
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare no competing financial interests.

© Pure Earth 2019.

DOI: 10.5696/2156-9614-9.24.191209
PMCID: PMC6905135
PMID: 31893170


587. Can J Anaesth. 2020 Apr;67(4):462-474. doi: 10.1007/s12630-019-01551-0. Epub 
2019 Dec 6.

The use of extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal in acute chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease exacerbation: a narrative review.

[Article in English]

d'Andrea A(1), Banfi C(2)(3)(4), Bendjelid K(5)(3)(4), Giraud R(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Service d'anesthésiologie, Hôpital Riviera-Chablais, Montreux, Switzerland.
(2)Département de chirurgie cardio-thoracique, Istituto Clinico Sant'Ambrogio, 
Gruppo Ospedaliero San Donato, Milan, Italy.
(3)Faculté de médecine, Université de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Faculté de médecine, Groupe de recherche hémodynamique, Geneva, Switzerland.
(5)Service des soins intensifs, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, 4, Rue 
Gabrielle Perret-Gentil, 1211, Geneva 14, Switzerland.
(6)Service des soins intensifs, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, 4, Rue 
Gabrielle Perret-Gentil, 1211, Geneva 14, Switzerland. Raphael.Giraud@hcuge.ch.
(7)Faculté de médecine, Université de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland. 
Raphael.Giraud@hcuge.ch.
(8)Faculté de médecine, Groupe de recherche hémodynamique, Geneva, Switzerland. 
Raphael.Giraud@hcuge.ch.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation induces hypercapnic 
respiratory acidosis. Extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal (ECCO2R) aims to 
eliminate blood carbon dioxide (CO2) in order to reduce adverse effects from 
hypercapnia and the related acidosis. Hypercapnia has deleterious 
extra-pulmonary consequences in increasing intracranial pressure and inducing 
and/or worsening right heart failure. During COPD exacerbation, the use of 
ECCO2R may improve the efficacy of non-invasive ventilation (NIV) in terms of 
CO2 removal, decrease respiratory rate and reduce dynamic hyperinflation and 
intrinsic positive end expiratory pressure, which all contribute to increasing 
dead space. Moreover, ECCO2R may prevent NIV failure while facilitating the 
weaning of intubated patients from mechanical ventilation. In this review of the 
literature, the authors will present the current knowledge on the 
pathophysiology related to COPD, the principles of the ECCO2R technique and its 
role in acute and severe decompensation of COPD. However, despite technical 
advances, there are only case series in the literature and few prospective 
studies to clearly establish the role of ECCO2R in acute and severe COPD 
decompensation.

DOI: 10.1007/s12630-019-01551-0
PMID: 31811514


588. Respirology. 2020 May 19. doi: 10.1111/resp.13841. Online ahead of print.

Disease burden of eosinophilic airway disease: Comparing severe asthma, COPD and 
asthma-COPD overlap.

Hiles SA(1), Gibson PG(1)(2), McDonald VM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Excellence in Severe Asthma and Priority Research Centre for 
Healthy Lungs, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW, Australia.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, John Hunter Hospital, 
Newcastle, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: There is less understanding of phenotypes and disease 
burden in asthma-COPD overlap (ACO) than either disease alone. Blood eosinophils 
may help identify the patients in the clinic with eosinophilic airway 
inflammation. The potential value of this approach requires an understanding of 
the illness burden associated with eosinophilic ACO, eosinophilic severe asthma 
and eosinophilic COPD, defined by blood eosinophils.
METHODS: Participants from studies of multidimensional assessment in airway 
disease were pooled to identify patients with ACO (n = 106), severe asthma (n = 
64) and COPD alone (n = 153). Patients were assessed cross-sectionally for 
demographic and clinical characteristics, including disease burden indicators 
such as health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and past-year exacerbation. 
Eosinophilic patients were identified using different thresholds of blood 
eosinophil count.
RESULTS: Using a blood eosinophil count ≥0.3 × 109 /L, 41% had eosinophilic 
airway disease: 55% in ACO, 44% in severe asthma and 29% in COPD. Blood and 
sputum eosinophils were moderately correlated (rs = 0.51, n = 257, P < 0.001). 
Burden of disease was similar between eosinophilic and non-eosinophilic airway 
diseases, with poor HRQoL and high number of past-year exacerbations. Burden of 
disease was similar across eosinophilic severe asthma, COPD and ACO. 
Eosinophilic COPD tended to have poorer health status than eosinophilic ACO and 
severe asthma; however, in context of a high prevalence of eosinophilic ACO, 
cumulative population-level burden of eosinophilic disease was greater in ACO.
CONCLUSION: Disease burden across eosinophilic ACO, eosinophilic severe asthma 
and eosinophilic COPD was high, particularly cumulative population-level burden 
in ACO. Factors beyond airway inflammation may drive disease burden in severe 
patients.

© 2020 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13841
PMID: 32428971


589. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Jun 19;15:1449-1464. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S245842. eCollection 2020.

Multiple Factor Analysis of Depression and/or Anxiety in Patients with Acute 
Exacerbation Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Long J(1)(2), Ouyang Y(1), Duan H(3), Xiang Z(2), Ma H(2), Ju M(4), Sun D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical 
University, Zunyi City, Guizhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Zunyi Fifth People's Hospital (Zunyi Mental Health Center), Zunyi City, 
Guizhou, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical 
University, Zunyi City, Guizhou, People's Republic of China.
(4)Shanghai Mental Health Center Affiliated to School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai City, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To reveal the risk factors, the symptom distribution characteristics, 
the clinical values of white blood cell counts (WBC counts), red blood cell 
distribution width (RDW), neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR), 
platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio (PLR) and monocyte-to-lymphocyte ratio (MLR) in 
hospitalized patients with acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (AECOPD) combined with depression and/or anxiety.
METHODS: The study included prospective cross-sectional and case-control 
studies, and was executed in the Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical 
University, Guizhou, China. Previously diagnosed chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) patients who admitted to the hospital with AECOPD, patients with 
depression and/or anxiety, and healthy people were enrolled in the study. The 
Hamilton Rating Scales were used to assess all subjects, and the complete blood 
counts (CBC) were collected. Baseline data and clinical measurement data 
[spirometry, arterial blood gas analysis, and COPD evaluation test (the CAT 
scale)] from patients with AECOPD were collected.
RESULTS: Of the 307 patients with AECOPD included, 63.5% (N=195) had depressive 
and/or anxiety symptoms, and 36.5% (N=112) had no symptoms. Sex, respiratory 
failure, number of comorbidities, number of acute exacerbations in the previous 
year and the CAT score were closely related to AECOPD combined with depression 
and/or anxiety (p<0.05). The CAT scale score were the independent risk factor 
(OR=6.576, 95% CI 3.812-11.342) and significant predictor of AECOPD with 
depression and/or anxiety (AUC=0.790,95% CI 0.740-0.834); the patients with 
depression and/or anxiety were more severe and characteristic than the patients 
with AECOPD combined with depression and/or anxiety; RDW was associated with 
AECOPD with depression and/or anxiety (p=0.020, OR1.212,95% CI1.03-1.426), and 
had certain clinical diagnostic value (AUC=0.570,95% CI 0.531-0.626).
CONCLUSION: Depression and anxiety should not be ignored in patients with 
AECOPD. The severity and quality of life of COPD were closely related to the 
occurrence of depression and/or anxiety symptoms. In most cases, perhaps 
depression and anxiety in AECOPD are only symptoms and not to the extents of the 
diseases. RDW had clinical diagnostic value in AECOPD combined with depression 
and/or anxiety. NLR, PLR, MLR, and RDW may become the novel indicators for 
evaluating the degree of inflammation of AECOPD and deserve further research.

© 2020 Long et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S245842
PMCID: PMC7310996
PMID: 32606653

Conflict of interest statement: The authors participating in this study stated 
that there was no conflict of interest.


590. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 Jun 29. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1702210. Online 
ahead of print.

Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
Exacerbations.

Bulpa P(1), Duplaquet F(2), Dimopoulos G(3), Vogelaers D(4), Blot S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Mont-Godinne University Hospital, CHU UCL 
Namur, Namur, Belgium.
(2)Department of Pneumology, Mont-Godinne University Hospital, CHU UCL Namur, 
Namur, Belgium.
(3)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Attikon University Hospital, Haidari, 
Greece.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.

Nowadays, reports in the literature support that patients with severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are at higher risk to develop invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA). However, the interpretation of 
Aspergillus-positive cultures from the airways in critically ill COPD is still a 
challenge. Indeed, as the patient could be merely colonized, tissue samples are 
required to ascertain IPA diagnosis but they are rarely obtained before death. 
Consequently, diagnosis is often only suspected on the basis of a combination of 
three elements: clinical characteristics, radiological images (mostly thoracic 
CT scan), and microbiological, and occasionally serological, results. To 
facilitate the analysis of these data, several algorithms have been developed, 
and the best effectiveness has been demonstrated by the Clinical algorithm. This 
is of importance as IPA prognosis in these patients remains presently very poor 
and using such an algorithm could promote prompter diagnosis, early initiation 
of treatment, and subsequently improved outcome.While the most classical 
presentation of IPA in critically ill COPD patients features a combination of 
obstructive respiratory failure, antibiotic-resistant pneumonia, recent or 
chronic corticosteroid therapy, and positive Aspergillus cultures from the lower 
respiratory tract, the present article will also address less typical 
presentations and discuss the most appropriate treatments which could alter 
prognosis.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0040-1702210
PMID: 32599634

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


591. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2020 Apr 19:1-8. doi: 10.1080/17476348.2020.1752671. 
Online ahead of print.

Practical recommendations for the use of beta-blockers in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Wade C(1)(2), Wells JM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(2)Lung Health Center, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)Acute Care Service, Birmingham VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA.

Introduction: Controversies regarding the use of beta-blocker in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have been longstanding and based on 
inconsistent data. COPD and cardiovascular disease have many shared risk factors 
and potentially overlapping pathophysiologic mechanisms. Beta-blockers, a 
mainstay of treatment in ischemic heart disease, congestive heart failure, and 
cardiac arrhythmia, remain underutilized in COPD patients despite considerable 
evidence of safety. Furthermore, observational studies indicated the potential 
benefits of beta-blockers in COPD via a variety of possible mechanisms. 
Recently, a randomized controlled trial of metoprolol versus placebo failed to 
show a reduction in COPD exacerbation risk in subjects with moderate to severe 
COPD and no absolute indication for beta-blocker use.Areas covered: Physiology 
of beta-adrenergic receptors, links between COPD and cardiovascular disease, and 
the role of beta-blockers in COPD management are discussed.Expert commentary: 
Beta-blockers should not be used to treat COPD patients who do not have 
conditions with clear guideline-directed recommendations for their use. 
Vigilance is recommended in prescribing these medications for indications where 
another drug class could be utilized.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2020.1752671
PMID: 32250198


592. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Aug 6;14:1753-1762. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S201314. eCollection 2019.

Bronchodilators for hyperinflation in COPD associated with biomass smoke: 
clinical trial.

Ramírez-Venegas A(1), Velázquez-Uncal M(1), Aranda-Chávez A(1), Guzmán-Bouilloud 
NE(1), Mayar-Maya ME(2), Pérez Lara-Albisua JL(1), Hernández-Zenteno RJ(3), 
Flores-Trujillo F(3), Sansores RH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tobacco Smoking and COPD Research, Instituto Nacional de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael Cosió Villegas", Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Department of Medical Attention, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades 
Respiratorias "Ismael Cosió Villegas", Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Obstructive Disease Ward, Pulmonary Obstructive Diseases Clinical Service, 
Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael Cosío Villegas", Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Medica Sur Clinic & Foundation , Mexico 
City, Mexico.

INTRODUCTION: The efficacy of long-acting bronchodilators for COPD associated 
with biomass (BE-COPD) has not been properly evaluated.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the acute effect of indacaterol (IND) 150 μg q.d and 
tiotropium (TIO) 18 μg q.d. on lung hyperinflation, walking distance (WD) and 
dyspnea during the six-minute walking test (6MWT) in moderate BE-COPD at 30, 60 
and 240 mins post-drug administration.
DESIGN: Randomized, controlled, open-level, crossover noninferiority clinical 
trial. Forty-two women with BE-COPD were randomly assigned to a bronchodilator 
sequence: IND-TIO or vice versa.
RESULTS: There were statistically significant changes over time in inspiratory 
capacity (IC) (p<0.0001), FEV1 (p<0.0001) and FVC (p<0.0001) when IND was used. 
When TIO was administered, an increase over all time periods was observed only 
for FEV1 (p<0.0001) and FVC (p<0.0001), whereas for IC an increase was observed 
only at 30 mins and 24 hrs after TIO administration. We did not find clinically 
significant increases in WD and dyspnea after the administration of both 
bronchodilators.
CONCLUSION: Both IND and TIO showed significant and fast onset improvement in 
hyperinflation. Therefore, either of them may be recommended as a first line of 
treatment for COPD associated with BE-COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S201314
PMCID: PMC6689558
PMID: 31496674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


593. Respiration. 2019;97(4):292-301. doi: 10.1159/000493860. Epub 2018 Nov 2.

Patient Satisfaction and Clinical Outcomes with Budesonide plus Formoterol 
Spiromax for Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Real-World, 
Observational Trial.

Gillissen A(1), Gessner C(2), Hechenbichler K(3), Herth FJF(4), Juenemann R(5), 
Kanniess F(6), Kardos P(7), Lommatzsch M(8), Schneidereit R(5), Windisch W(9).

Author information:
(1)Kreiskliniken Reutlingen/Ermstalklinik, Reutlingen-Bad Urach, Germany, 
gillissen_a@klin-rt.de.
(2)POIS Leipzig GbR, Gessner & Gessner, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Institut Dr. Schauerte, Munich, Germany.
(4)Thoraxklink, University of Heidelberg and Translational Lung Research Center 
(TLRC), Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Teva GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Gemeinschaftspraxis Reinfeld, Reinfeld, Germany.
(7)Maingau Hospital, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(8)University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
(9)Cologne Merheim Hospital, Witten/Herdecke University, Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The fixed-dose combination of budesonide/formoterol (B/F) has been 
available in the Spiromax® dry powder inhaler since 2014.
OBJECTIVES: To assess patient satisfaction, inhaler use errors, and disease 
control in patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
treated with B/F Spiromax.
METHODS: This non-interventional, prospective, 12-week study enrolled 
consecutive asthma or COPD patients who had recently begun treatment with B/F 
Spiromax or were switched from another inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting 
β2-agonist combination to B/F Spiromax in routine clinical practice. Patients 
recruited from 243 specialist respiratory clinics or general practices in 
Germany were assessed for patient satisfaction (Satisfaction with Inhalers and 
Preference questionnaire), inhaler application errors (modified Easy Low 
Instruction over Time checklist), disease control, and safety.
RESULTS: The population included 3,943 patients: asthma n = 2,707 (68.7%); COPD 
n = 1,236 (31.3%). At baseline, 60.1% of patients were "satisfied" or "very 
satisfied" with their previous inhaler, and this increased to 88.8% at week 12 
of B/F Spiromax use. Overall, 62.1% of pre-treated patients preferred B/F 
Spiromax to their old inhaler. The frequency of any handling error observed with 
B/F Spiromax at week 12 was lower than at baseline (11.9 vs. 25.5% of patients, 
respectively). After 12 weeks, 77.4% were assessed as having improved 
(minimally, much, or very much) overall health status versus baseline. 
Guideline-defined disease severity (as rated by physicians) and patient-reported 
symptom severity improved during the study in both asthma and COPD patients. B/F 
Spiromax was well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: B/F Spiromax was associated with high patient satisfaction, low 
device handling error rate, and improvements in clinical outcomes in real-world 
clinical practice.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000493860
PMID: 30391944


594. Pneumologie. 2019 Jul;73(7):430-438. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-103033. Epub 2019 Jul 
10.

[Refractory Dyspnea in Advanced COPD: Palliative Treatment with Opioids].

[Article in German]

Ficker JH, Brückl WM.

Dyspnea is a leading symptom in COPD. Bronchodilators (long acting 
anticholinergics and long acting beta agonists) are the mainstay of medical 
treatment. Non pharmacological therapies like pulmonary rehabilitation, 
long-term oxygen therapy or lung volume reduction can help to further improve 
dyspnea. Nevertheless, patients with advanced disease may develop refractory 
dyspnea. Randomized controlled trials demonstrated that the palliative treatment 
with low-dose systemic opioids is an effective treatment option in these 
patients. A low starting dose (e. g. 1.0 mg morphine, immediate release) is 
recommended. Subsequent doses are titrated to achieve the lowest effective dose 
based on whether dyspnea relief has been achieved and whether any side effects 
have developed. This low-dose opioid treatment has been demonstrated to be safe 
for symptom reduction in severe COPD and is not associated with increased 
hospital admissions or deaths. Physicians should offer a trial of low-dose oral 
opioids to patients with refractory dyspnea that affects their daily activities 
and quality of life.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-103033
PMID: 31291670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autoren geben an, dass kein 
Interessenkonflikt besteht.


595. Respiration. 2019;97(5):406-415. doi: 10.1159/000495312. Epub 2019 Jan 16.

Can Early Introduction of Palliative Care Limit Intensive Care, Emergency and 
Hospital Admissions in Patients with Severe Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease? A Pilot Randomized Study.

Janssens JP(1), Weber C(2), Herrmann FR(3), Cantero C(4), Pessina A(4), Matis 
C(5), Merlet Viollet R(6), Boiche-Brouillard L(5), Stirnemann J(4), Pautex S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Diseases, Department of Medical Specialties, Geneva 
University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, Jean-Paul.Janssens@hcuge.ch.
(2)Department of Community Medicine, Primary Care, and Emergency, Geneva 
University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Rehabilitation and 
Geriatrics, Geneva University Hospitals and University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(4)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Rehabilitation and Geriatrics, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Palliative Care and Rehabilitation, Geneva University 
Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Center for Clinical Research, Department of Anesthesiology, Pharmacology, and 
Intensive Care, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Despite their poor prognosis, patients with severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have little access to palliative care and 
tend to have a high rate of hospital and intensive care unit (ICU) admissions 
during their last year of life.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the feasibility of a home palliative care intervention 
during 1 year versus usual care, and the possible impact of this intervention on 
emergency, hospital and ICU admissions, survival, mood, and health-related 
quality of life (HRQL).
METHODS: Prospective controlled study of patients with severe COPD (GOLD stage 
III or IV) and long-term oxygen therapy and/or home noninvasive ventilation 
and/or one or more hospital admissions in the previous year for acute 
exacerbation, randomized to usual care versus usual care with add-on monthly 
intervention by palliative care specialists at home for 12 months.
RESULTS: Of 315 patients screened, 49 (15.5%) were randomized (26 to early 
palliative care; 23 to the control group); aged (mean ± SD) 71 ± 8 years; FEV1 
was 37 ± 14% predicted; 88% with a COPD assessment test score > 10; 69% on 
long-term oxygen therapy or home noninvasive ventilation. The patients accepted 
the intervention and completed the assessment scales. After 1 year, there was no 
difference between groups in symptoms, HRQL and mood, and there was a 
nonsignificant trend for higher admission rates to hospital and emergency wards 
in the intervention group.
CONCLUSION: Although this pilot study was underpowered to formally exclude a 
benefit from palliative care in severe COPD, it raises several questions as to 
patient selection, reluctance to palliative care in this group, and modalities 
of future trials.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000495312
PMID: 30650418


596. BMJ Open. 2019 Nov 24;9(11):e033524. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-033524.

Improving access to health care for people with severe chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) in Southern New Zealand: qualitative study of the views 
of health professional stakeholders and patients.

Stokes T(1), Tumilty E(2), Latu ATF(3), Doolan-Noble F(4), Baxter J(3), McAuley 
K(4), Hannah D(5), Donlevy S(5), Dummer J(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Practice and Rural Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, 
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand tim.stokes@otago.ac.nz.
(2)Institute for Translational Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch 
School of Health Professions, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(3)Kōhatu, Centre for Hauora Māori, Division of Health Sciences, University of 
Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(4)Department of General Practice and Rural Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, 
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(5)Southern District Health Board, Otago and Southland, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(6)Department of Medicine, Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand.

OBJECTIVES: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common chronic 
disease with significant morbidity and mortality, particularly for Māori, which 
places a large burden on the New Zealand (NZ) health system. We undertook a 
qualitative study as part of a mixed-methods implementation research project 
which aimed to determine the barriers and enablers to the provision of 
accessible high-quality COPD care.
SETTING: Southern Health Region of NZ (Otago and Southland).
PARTICIPANTS: Thirteen health professional stakeholders and 23 patients with 
severe COPD (including one Māori and one Pasifika participant).
METHODS: Semistructured interviews were undertaken. A thematic analysis using 
the Levesque conceptual framework for access to healthcare was conducted.
RESULTS: Health professional stakeholders identified barriers to providing 
access to health services, in particular: availability (inadequate staffing and 
resourcing of specialist services and limited geographical availability of 
pulmonary rehabilitation), affordability (both of regular medication, medication 
needed for an exacerbation of COPD and the copayment charge for seeing a general 
practitioner) and appropriateness (a shared model of care across primary and 
secondary care was needed to facilitate better delivery of key interventions 
such as pulmonary rehabilitation and advance care planning (ACP). Māori 
stakeholders highlighted the importance of communication and relationships and 
the role of whānau (extended family) for support. Patients' accounts showed 
variable ability to access services through having a limited understanding of 
what COPD is, a limited knowledge of services they could access, being unable to 
attend pulmonary rehabilitation (due to comorbidities) and direct (medication 
and copayment charges) and indirect (transport) costs.
CONCLUSIONS: People with severe COPD experience multilevel barriers to accessing 
healthcare in the NZ health system along the pathway of care from diagnosis to 
ACP. These need to be addressed by local health services if this group of 
patients are to receive high-quality care.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-033524
PMCID: PMC6886961
PMID: 31767598

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


597. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Jun 8;15:1287-1299. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S252097. eCollection 2020.

Th1/Th17 Cytokine Profiles are Associated with Disease Severity and Exacerbation 
Frequency in COPD Patients.

Yu Y(#)(1), Zhao L(#)(1), Xie Y(1), Xu Y(1), Jiao W(2), Wu J(2), Deng X(2), Fang 
G(2), Xue Q(2), Zheng Y(1)(3), Gao Z(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Peking University 
People's Hospital, Beijing 100044, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Ningde Municipal Hospital 
Affiliated to Fujian Medical University, Ningde, Fujian 352100, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Xiang'An Hospital of 
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361100, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: T helper (Th) cell cytokine imbalances have been associated with the 
pathophysiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), including the 
Th1/Th2 and Th17/T regulatory cells (Treg) paradigms. Clarifying cytokine 
profiles during COPD acute exacerbation (AE) and their relationships with 
clinical manifestations would help in understanding the pathogenesis of disease 
and improve clinical management.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eighty seven patients admitted to the hospital with AEs 
of COPD were included in this study, and follow-up was conducted after discharge 
(every 30 days, for a total of 120 days). Sputum samples of patients at 
different time points (including at admission, discharge, and follow-up) were 
collected, and sputum cytokine profiling (12 cytokines in total) was performed 
using a Luminex assay.
RESULTS: According to the cytokine profiles at admission, patients were divided 
into three clusters by a k-means clustering algorithm, namely, Th1high Th17high 
(n=26), Th1lowTh17low (n=56), and Th1high Th17low (n=5), which revealed distinct 
clinical characteristics. Patients with Th1high Th17low profile had a 
significantly longer length of non-invasive ventilation time and length of 
hospital stay than patients with Th1high Th17high profile (7 vs 0 days, 22 vs 11 
days, respectively, p < 0.05), and had the highest AE frequency. Sputum levels 
of Th17 cytokines (IL-17A, IL-22, and IL-23) during AE were negatively 
correlated with AE frequency in the last 12 months (r = -0.258, -0.289 and 
-0.216, respectively, p < 0.05). Moreover, decreased sputum IL-17A levels were 
independently associated with increased AE frequency, with an OR (95% CI) of 
0.975 (0.958-0.993) and p = 0.006.
CONCLUSION: Th1/Th17 imbalance during AE is associated with the severity of 
COPD. Decreased Th17 cytokine expression is correlated with increased AE 
frequency. The Th1/Th17 balance may be a specific target for the therapeutic 
manipulation of COPD.

© 2020 Yu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S252097
PMCID: PMC7294048
PMID: 32606639

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


598. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2020 Jan 9;15:79-88. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S222945. 
eCollection 2020.

Ultrasound Evaluation of the Quadriceps Muscle Contractile Index in Patients 
with Stable Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Relationships with Clinical 
Symptoms, Disease Severity and Diaphragm Contractility.

Maynard-Paquette AC(1), Poirier C(2), Chartrand-Lefebvre C(3)(4), Dubé BP(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CHUM), Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(2)Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CHUM), Department of 
Medicine, Respiratory Medicine Division, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CHUM), Department of 
Radiology, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(4)Research Center of the CHUM (CRCHUM) - Imaging and Engineering Axis, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Research Center of the CHUM (CRCHUM) - Health Innovation and Evaluation Hub, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

RATIONALE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with 
changes in the composition and function of peripheral and respiratory muscles, 
which can negatively impact quality of life. Ultrasonography can provide a 
non-invasive evaluation of the integrity of both peripheral muscles and 
diaphragm, but its use in patients with COPD is still being investigated. We 
aimed at evaluating the relationship between quadriceps size, using 
ultrasonography and symptoms, lung function and diaphragm contractility in a 
cohort of patients with COPD.
METHODS: COPD patients were prospectively recruited and ultrasonography of the 
dominant quadriceps and of the diaphragm was performed. Quadriceps size was 
evaluated using three measurements: 1) cross-sectional area of the rectus 
femoris (Qcsa), 2) thickness (Qthick) and 3) contractile index (Qci), defined as 
the ratio of quadriceps thickness/total anterior thigh thickness. Diaphragm 
contractility was evaluated using thickening fraction (TFdi). Clinical 
characteristics and number of moderate-to-severe exacerbations in the previous 
year were retrieved from medical files. Dyspnea (mMRC scale) and disease impact 
on health status (COPD Assessment Test (CAT)) were measured at inclusion. 
Fat-free mass index (FFMI) was assessed using bioelectrical impedance.
RESULTS: Forty patients were recruited (20 males, mean age and FEV1 66±6 years 
and 49±17%predicted, respectively). Mean Qcsa, Qthick and Qci were 336±145 mm2, 
1.55±0.53 cm and 64±16%, respectively, and mean TFdi was 91±36%. Qci was 
significantly correlated with FFMI (rho=0.59, p=0.001), TFdi (rho=0.41, 
p=0.008), FEV1 (rho=0.43, p=0.001) but not with age (rho=0.18, p=0.28). Qci was 
significantly correlated to CAT score (rho=-0.47, p=0.002), even when controlled 
for FEV1, and was lower in patients with an mMRC score ≥2 (55±15 vs 70±14%, 
p=0.002). Qcsa and Qci were significantly lower in patients with frequent 
exacerbations. In a multiple linear regression analysis that included age, 
gender, FFMI, FEV1 and TFdi, only FFMI and TFdi were found to be significantly 
related to lower Qci values.
CONCLUSION: In patients with COPD, ultrasound evaluation of the quadriceps 
contractile index is feasible and related to disease severity, clinical 
symptoms, exacerbation history and diaphragm contractility. As such, it may 
provide a novel tool for the evaluation of the severity and burden of the 
disease in this population. Further studies are required to better delineate its 
potential role as a prognostic marker in this population.

© 2020 Maynard-Paquette et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S222945
PMCID: PMC6957010
PMID: 32021146

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Carl Chartrand-Lefebvre reports research 
collaborations with Terarecon and Seimens outside of the submitted work. The 
authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


599. J Am Pharm Assoc (2003). 2019 Jul-Aug;59(4):479-488.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.japh.2019.04.017. Epub 2019 May 22.

Assessment of symptom burden and adherence to respiratory medications in 
individuals self-reporting a diagnosis of COPD within a community pharmacy 
setting.

Bollmeier SG, Seaton TL, Prosser TR, Chou YT, Reckenberg K, Hahn B, Stanford RH, 
Ray R.

OBJECTIVES: Data on symptom burden or medication adherence in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) within a community pharmacy setting 
are limited. This study assessed symptom burden and adherence to respiratory 
medications in individuals reporting COPD, chronic bronchitis, or emphysema 
diagnoses visiting community pharmacies.
DESIGN: This cross-sectional study enrolled participants visiting 35 community 
pharmacies in Missouri (October 2016 to April 2017).
PARTICIPANTS: Eligible participants (aged 40 years or more with a self-reported 
history of COPD, prescription for at least 1 COPD maintenance medication during 
the previous 12 months, and able to complete an English questionnaire) were 
identified from pharmacy dispensing records.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Participants completed a questionnaire assessing 
demographics, clinical characteristics, health literacy, COPD Assessment Test 
(CAT) modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) dyspnea scale scores, and 
exacerbation history. Recent spirometry data were obtained, if available, from 
participants' physicians. COPD was classified according to the Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2016 criteria. Medication adherence 
was assessed as proportion of days covered (PDC) from dispensing records.
RESULTS: Of 682 participants (mean age 63.0 years; 57% female) with available 
pharmacy data, 251 (36.8%) had available spirometry data. Most participants had 
mMRC scores ≥ 2 (60.9%) and CAT scores ≥ 10 (90.2%); 57.2% reported at least 2 
moderate or 1 or more severe exacerbations within the previous 12 months. GOLD 
classifications varied depending on the scale used (mMRC vs. CAT); more 
participants were classified as group C/D than group A/B, with the highest 
proportion classified as group D (higher symptom burden and exacerbation risk). 
Mean PDC was 0.46 ± 0.37; only 28.7% of participants were adherent (PDC ≥ 80%) 
to at least 1 COPD maintenance medication.
CONCLUSION: Individuals self-reporting a COPD diagnosis receiving respiratory 
medications from community pharmacies in Missouri have a high symptom burden and 
low medication adherence. Further research should determine reasons for low 
adherence and ways to reduce COPD symptoms.

Copyright © 2019 American Pharmacists Association®. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.japh.2019.04.017
PMID: 31126830


600. J Proteome Res. 2020 Jan 3;19(1):64-74. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00345. Epub 
2019 Nov 7.

NMR-Based Metabolomics for the Assessment of Inhaled Pharmacotherapy in Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Patients.

Vignoli A(1)(2), Santini G(3)(4), Tenori L(1)(5), Macis G(6), Mores N(3)(4), 
Macagno F(7), Pagano F(8)(9), Higenbottam T(10), Luchinat C(1)(2)(11), Montuschi 
P(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center (CERM) , University of Florence , Via Luigi Sacconi 
6 , Sesto Fiorentino , Italy 50019.
(2)Consorzio Interuniversitario Risonanze Magnetiche di Metallo Proteine 
(CIRMMP) , Piazza San Marco 4 , Florence , Italy 50121.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of the 
Sacred Heart, Largo F. Vito, 1, Rome, Italy 00168
(4)Pharmacology Unit, University Hospital Agostino Gemelli Foundation, IRCCS, 
Largo Agostino Gemelli, 8, Rome, Italy 00168
(5)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine , University of Florence , 
Largo Brambilla 3 , Florence , Italy 50100.
(6)Imaging Diagnostics,University Hospital Agostino Gemelli Foundation, IRCCS, 
Largo Agostino Gemelli, 8, Rome, Italy 00168
(7)Respiratory Medicine Unit,University Hospital Agostino Gemelli Foundation, 
IRCCS, Largo Agostino Gemelli, 8, Rome, Italy 00168
(8)Ageing Unit, University Hospital Agostino Gemelli Foundation, IRCCS, Largo 
Agostino Gemelli, 8, Rome, Italy 00168
(9)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic 
University of the Sacred Heart, Largo F. Vito, 1, Rome, Italy 00168
(10)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Medicine , Royal College of Physicians , London 
NW1 4LE , United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff" , University of Florence , Via della 
Lastruccia 3 , Sesto Fiorentino , Italy 50019.

The aim of this proof-of-concept, pilot study was the evaluation of the effects 
of steroid administration and suspension of an inhaled corticosteroid 
(ICS)-long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) extrafine fixed dose combination (FDC) on 
metabolomic fingerprints in subjects with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). We hypothesized that a comprehensive metabolomics approach discriminates 
across inhaled pharmacotherapies and that their effects on metabolomic 
signatures depend on the biological fluids analyzed. We performed metabolomics 
via nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy in exhaled breath condensate 
(EBC), sputum supernatants, serum, and urine. Fourteen patients suffering from 
COPD who were on regular inhaled fluticasone propionate/salmeterol therapy 
(visit 1) were consecutively treated with 2-week beclomethasone 
dipropionate/formoterol (visit 2), 4-week formoterol alone (visit 3), and 4-week 
beclomethasone/formoterol (visit 4). The comprehensive NMR-based metabolomics 
approach showed differences across all pharmacotherapies and that different 
biofluids provided orthogonal information. Serum formate was lower at visits 1 
versus 3 (P = 0.03), EBC formate was higher at visit 1 versus 4 (P = 0.03), and 
urinary 1-methyl-nicotinamide was lower at 3 versus 4 visit (P = 0.002). 
NMR-based metabolomics of different biofluids distinguishes across inhaled 
pharmacotherapies, provides complementary information on the effects of an 
extrafine ICS/LABA FDC on metabolic fingerprints in COPD patients, and might be 
useful for elucidating the ICS mechanism of action.
